The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Source and Mode of Solar Energy
Throughout the Universe, by Isaac Winter Heysinger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Source and Mode of Solar Energy Throughout the Universe

Author: Isaac Winter Heysinger

Release Date: January 4, 2018 [EBook #56302]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOURCE AND MODE OF SOLAR ENERGY ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








                                  THE
                            SOURCE AND MODE
                                   OF
                              SOLAR ENERGY
                        THROUGHOUT THE UNIVERSE.

                                   BY
                      I. W. HEYSINGER, M.A., M.D.



                              ILLUSTRATED.

                             PHILADELPHIA:
                       J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.

                                 1895.








CONTENTS.


                                                            PAGE

    Introduction                                               7

    CHAPTER I.

    Statement of the Problem of Solar Energy                  17

    CHAPTER II.

    The Constitution and Phenomena of the Sun                 39

    CHAPTER III.

    The Mode of Solar Energy                                  70

    CHAPTER IV.

    The Source of Solar Energy                                96

    CHAPTER V.

    The Distribution and Conservation of Solar Energy        139

    CHAPTER VI.

    The Phenomena of the Stars                               162

    CHAPTER VII.

    Temporary Stars, Meteors, and Comets                     187

    CHAPTER VIII.

    The Phenomena of Comets                                  210

    CHAPTER IX.

    Interpretation of Cometic Phenomena                      225

    CHAPTER X.

    The Resolvable Nebulæ, Star-Clusters and Galaxies        237

    CHAPTER XI.

    The Gaseous Nebulæ                                       253

    CHAPTER XII.

    The Nebular Hypothesis: its Basis and its Difficulties   268

    CHAPTER XIII.

    The Genesis of Solar Systems and Galaxies                282

    CHAPTER XIV.

    The Mosaic Cosmogony                                     308

    CHAPTER XV.

    Conclusion. The Harmony of Nature's Laws and
    Operations                                               341

    Reference Index of Authorities Cited                     349

    Classified Index of Subject-Matter                       353








LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                  PAGE

    Figs. 1 to 8. Types from nature, illustrating development
             of a solar system from the attenuated matter of
             space                                        Frontispiece.
    Fig.  9. A typical sun-spot                                     57
    Fig. 10. Structure of the sun, analytical illustration of       60
    Fig. 11. Electrical polarities of sun and planets               82
    Fig. 12. Ideal view of the generation and transmission of
             planetary electricity                                  89
    Fig. 13. The aurora borealis, view of                           91
    Fig. 14. Diffused brush discharge of an electrical machine      91
    Fig. 15. Planetary generation and transmission of electrical
             energy to the sun, analytical illustration of         101
    Fig. 16. Gradual discharge of electricity from one conductor
             to another in a partial vacuum                        103
    Fig. 17. Sudden electrical discharge through the atmosphere    103
    Fig. 18. Position of planets with reference to the generation
             of sun-spots; maximum and minimum of electrical
             action                                                108
    Fig. 19. Analysis of a typical sun-spot                        112
    Fig. 20. Retardation of sun-spots in their travel across the
             solar face; development to the rear and recession in
             front                                                 114
    Figs. 21 and 22. Complex lines of planetary electrical action
             upon the sun produced by the inclination of the solar
             axis to the plane of the ecliptic                     120
    Figs. 23 to 29. Examples of electrical repulsion: Fig. 1,
             similarly electrified pith-balls; Fig. 2, the
             electrical windmill; Fig. 3, repulsion of a flame;
             Fig. 4, self-repulsion around a conductor; Fig. 5,
             attraction between opposite and repulsion between
             similar electricities; Fig. 6, mutual repulsion
             between similar + electrospheres of the earth and
             the moon; Fig. 7, mutual repulsion between the
             similar--electrospheres of sun and comet              124
    Figs. 30 to 34. Spectra of solar light, incandescent sodium
             and calcium, and the absorption and bright-line
             spectra of hydrogen gas                               155
    Figs. 35 to 37. Reversal and neutralization of spectroscopic
             lines of hydrogen in the light of a variable star
             like Betelgeuse                                       160
    Fig. 38. A double-sun nebula in process of development into
             a solar system                                        164
    Fig. 39. Double stars with complementary colors,
             interpretation of the phenomena of                    167
    Fig. 40. A solar system which would explain the regular
             variability of the star Mira                          178
    Fig. 41. Lineal nebula in Sobieski's Crown which has been
             affected by currents in the ocean of space            189
    Figs. 42 to 45. Four stages in the phenomena of a new or
             temporary star, a "star in flames;" reversal of the
             hydrogen lines in its spectrum                        196
    Figs. 46 and 47. Illustration of repulsion of the tail of a
             comet by the similarly electrified solar
             electrosphere; comparison with similar repulsion in
             a vacuum-chamber experiment                           211
    Figs. 48 and 49. The electroscope, and mutual electrical
             repulsion in a bundle of dry straws                   225
    Fig. 50. Experiment with a candle and currents of air from
             between two disks, illustrating the radial
             semi-rotation of a comet's tail during perihelion     230
    Figs. 51 to 54. Four non-systemic gaseous nebulæ: Fig. 1,
             crab nebula; Fig. 2, dumb-bell nebula; Fig. 3, lineal
             nebula in Sobieski's Crown; Fig. 4, Catherine-wheel
             nebula. The latter illustrates the formation of a
             planetary nebula with a hollow center, or else
             dispersion into the elements of space again           263
    Fig. 55. Great spiral nebula in Canes Venatici and a small
             adjacent nebula affected thereby                      273
    Figs. 56 to 59. Four gaseous nebulæ in process of development
             into solar systems: Fig. 1, divergent spiral; Fig. 2,
             later stage of a similar spiral; Fig. 3, subsequent
             stage of rupture of the nearly circular convolutions
             of a similar nebula; Fig. 4, the same stage in the
             development of a solar system with a double sun        279
    Fig. 60. Nucleated planetary nebula, showing its external ring
             split and held apart, in part of its circumference,
             by electrical repulsion                                288
    Fig. 61. Divergent spiral nebula on cover of book.








INTRODUCTION.


This work is not presented to the reader as a treatise on astronomy,
although the different phenomena pertaining to that splendid science
are reviewed with some detail, and the established facts bearing
upon the subjects discussed are briefly cited in the very words of
the great writers upon whose authority they rest. A considerable
experience in chemistry, electricity, and the other allied physical
sciences long since convinced the author of this work that some
simple and uniform principle must control the production of the
physical phenomena of astronomy,--some general law capable of being
extended in its application to the widest, as well as applied to the
narrowest, limits of that science. Knowing the absolute certainty of
a magnetic and electrical connection between the sun and the earth,
as evidenced by the reflected energy of sun-spots, auroras, etc.,
and that no known cause except electricity could account for some,
at least, of the cometic phenomena, it seemed that any comprehensive
law must at all events include this mode of energy as an effective
cause, and that if the law be uniform in its application, it must
equally exclude all others which may be either antagonistic or not
necessary. A careful investigation was therefore made of those
less generally known principles concerned in the generation and
transformations of electrical energy, in order to determine the
sufficiency or insufficiency of this agency in the grander operations
of nature (for, of course, mere currents of electricity could play no
part in these phenomena), with the result that every line of research
led irresistibly to the conclusions presented in this work. These
investigations, specifically directed, at first, to the source and mode
of the solar energy of our own system alone, were found to be equally
applicable to others, and were successively extended to the whole
sidereal, nebular, and cometic field, and finally to space itself,
for all the phenomena of which it seemed to furnish an adequate
and harmonious interpretation. The fact, when once demonstrated,
that the true source of solar energy is not to be found in the sun
itself, but in the potential energy of space, served as a guiding
principle, and, by its continuously extended application, was found
to cover perfectly the source and mode of all solar energy. Every
step of the investigation has been based on the established facts
of science and the observations of eminent astronomers as laid down
by the best authorities; and the quotations herein made from their
works are full and fair, and are properly credited in every case,
and taken from books easily accessible to the general reader. It is
hoped that further attention may be directed to this field of research
by far more capable investigators than the author of this work, so
that systematic astronomy may no longer bear the reproach that it is
largely an empirical science, but that it may henceforth be based
upon rational and comprehensive principles, capable of universal
extension and of general scientific application.

The authorities cited in this work include many illustrious names:
Proctor, Tyndall, Helmholtz, Langley, Huggins, Newcomb, Young,
Flammarion, Balfour Stewart, R. Kalley Miller, Herschel, Nichol,
Lord Rosse, Urbanitsky, Crookes, Fraunhofer, Ball, and many others,
all of whom are known throughout the world as among the master minds
of science. From them we have drawn the rich stores of knowledge
of the phenomena with which this work deals, and which we have so
fully and freely cited, as the basis of the splendid superstructure
which astronomy to-day reveals. No one will venture to controvert the
statements of fact made by these eminent men, and, where conflict of
opinion has arisen among them, we have quoted all parties, so that
the reader can form his own conclusion, in each case, for himself. So
diverse, apparently, are the phenomena reviewed that they present
the aspect of a great picture-gallery, in which the paintings totally
differ from each other in subject, in treatment, and in origin, their
only common qualities being those of grandeur and fidelity to truth
and to the principles of art. But they are not merely paintings, they
are the moving panorama of creation, and, diverse as they may appear,
they will be found to show the same "handling," which reveals the same
universal artist; they have, in truth, a common mode of development and
a common principle of construction, obscure as these may seem to be.

For thousands of years "Natural History," so called, was studied and
taught; zoölogy was a well-known science far back in old historic
times. But it was left for modern biological research to turn
from these fixed and fully-developed forms of life, and go back to
trace their primal development through what is now the science of
embryology, and thus we have learned that nature traverses the same
paths in forming a man as in producing a frog or a bird. The process
is carried further along in one case than in another, but the lines
of development are almost identical; and the tracing out of these
common lines and their subsequent divergencies has shed a flood of new
light upon these dark and hitherto unknown places, so that we are now
fairly on the true highway of physical life at last. When adult forms
were alone compared, animal with animal, no common ground of origin
or development could be discerned; nature was believed to work by
"special creations," and vast cataclysms were devised to utterly
destroy the organic life of one terrestrial epoch after another,
leaving a few hardy accidental survivors, or "types," perchance,
to trace back their lines of descent beyond such periods of cyclical
destruction. All this is now changed, and these views, so recently held
and taught, have been abandoned forever, and continuously operative
natural processes of development, modified by environment and heredity,
have taken their place, and biology now has a future as well as a
past. And so it must be with the less complex, but far more extended,
creations and transformations in the vast fields of astronomical
science with which this book is concerned. Hitherto we have here,
too, dealt with "special creations" and cataclysms; henceforth we
must follow the uniform and eternal laws of progressive development.

Among the multitude of hitherto unsolved problems of astronomy we may
enumerate the following: Why sun-spots travel faster around the sun
when near his equator than when more distant from it. The physical
causes of sun-spots, faculæ, and solar prominences. Why the number and
size of sun-spots seem to affect terrestrial magnetism. The rational
interpretation of the eleven-year and the long sun-spot cycles. The
origin of the aurora borealis. The causes of the periodicity of
regularly variable stars. How to explain, in accordance with the
nebular hypothesis, why Algol and its companion, which are not
greatly different in mass and volume, and both obviously gaseous,
should so differ in character, one being a bright sun and the other
a dark planet. Whether there are great, compact, but dark bodies,
comparable to suns and planets in magnitude, and unconnected with
any solar system, floating about in space. Why double and multiple
stars are so frequently of contrasted or complementary colors. Why
regularly variable stars are longer in decline than in growth of
brilliancy, since such decline is no criterion of loss of heat,
but rather the reverse. Why the sun and fixed stars have atmospheres
largely composed of free hydrogen, and the planets have atmospheres
of free oxygen and nitrogen. Why a small and sometimes even scarcely
visible star occasionally is seen to suddenly blaze up, in a few
hours, to hundreds of times its normal brilliancy, and then far more
gradually fade, through months and years, back to its former state,
in which thenceforth it continues to maintain its original lustre. Why
comets, when they have tails, always project these appendages radially
from the direction of the sun. How to account for the presence of
cyanogen, and how for the absence of oxygen and the constant presence
of hydrocarbon vapors around the nuclei of comets. Why some comets
split up into separate comets and others sometimes show multiple
tails. Why comets, when they pass around and behind the sun, in
some cases reappear shorn of their splendor and in other cases with
their splendor greatly enhanced. Whence comets are derived, where
is their permanent abiding-place, and how did they originally reach
those distant regions which they occupy before entering our system,
if merely the débris left behind from contraction of the mass of plasma
out of which our solar system is supposed to have been formed. Why so
many of the irresolvable nebulæ present the appearance of divergent
spirals of many different forms. How to account for the annular nebulæ
with hollow centers and for those partially-completed planetary nebulæ,
so called, which afterwards appear to retrograde into diffused gaseous
nebulæ again or gradually disappear. What is the ultimate constitution
of interstellar space? Have the fixed stars planetary systems like
our own, or not? Must they have such, or merely may they have? What
principle of conservation of energy is it possible to apply to the
vast quantities of light and heat which constantly disappear in
the interstellar realms of space? How to account for this enormous
emission of solar energy during the long period of time requisite for
the development of the earth during its past geological ages. How to
explain why the moon always presents the same face to the earth. Why,
if the law of gravity prevails there, there are no visible traces of
atmosphere or moisture in the moon. What is the basic principle on
which depends the ratio of mean planetary distances, 0, 3, 6, 12, 24,
etc., always plus 4? What is the origin of the planetary satellites
and the cause of their irregular distribution, and what the origin
of Saturn's rings? How was the belt of asteroids formed between
Mars and Jupiter? Why is the orbit of Neptune relatively compressed
against that of Uranus? Why is the mass of Neptune out of its proper
proportion compared with those of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune
in a diminishing series? What is the rational interpretation and what
the origin of the sun's corona and the cause of the coronal streamers?

There are many other problems equally difficult which are
encountered in the study of this noble science, but the above are
surely sufficiently striking. Any complete interpretation of these
various phenomena, even singly, would seem to be an important step in
advance; then how much more so if the explanation of one and all of
these is to be found in a single, all-embracing cause, a few simple
and uniformly operative principles, as unquestionably operative here
as in the other fields of science to which they pertain, and which,
once thoroughly comprehended and rigidly applied, will be found to
elucidate all the multifarious phenomena of sidereal space so clearly
and precisely that any intelligent observer and reasoner can determine
each question finally for himself, and solve not only these, but all
the other astronomical problems and paradoxes which have from time to
time arisen? It is not to be understood that this sublime science and
these illimitable realms are to be laid off with the metes and bounds
of a farmer's meadow, for all the lines of the different sciences are
linked together at a thousand points, but that the operative principles
which nature constantly employs once firmly grasped, the intricacy of
each series of phenomena encountered will become gradually lessened,
link by link, as observations and deductions are more closely and
rationally made along these well-established lines of research,
instead of here and there, empirically, and at hap-hazard, as has been
the only method hitherto possible to pursue. When the relatively few
fixed principles which control the operations of nature in the field
of astronomy are thoroughly comprehended, for on this vast panorama
she lays her colors with a heavy brush, we can study her phenomena
and interpret her processes even more readily than the kindred
sciences have enabled us to do in the adjacent fields of biology,
wherein the splendid achievements of less than a quarter of a century
past have not only aroused the interest and enthusiasm of the world,
but already point the way to still grander triumphs yet to come.








THE SOURCE AND MODE OF SOLAR ENERGY.


CHAPTER I.

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM OF SOLAR ENERGY.


In endeavoring to present a new and rational interpretation of
the source and mode of solar energy, based upon the established
principles of recent science, it becomes necessary to briefly cite
the facts bearing upon the problem to be solved and the authorities
for their support, as well as to describe concisely the different
hypotheses at present in vogue, and to point out the well-established
insufficiency of these theories, one and all, to account for or explain
the difficulties encountered, and which so far have remained as an
unsolved enigma. And this problem of solar energy is the grandest and
most important question of all physics, for upon the light and heat
of the sun depend all physical life and its consequences, animal
and vegetable, past, present, and future. If within finite time,
and relatively, compared with the enormous vistas of the past, a very
brief time, this source of energy is to cease, and our whole system
be involved in darkness and death, such darkness and death must be
eternal; for the dead sun in his final stage of condensation will be
as fixed and unchangeable as the operation of eternal laws can make
it, and henceforth there can be no revival or reversals, no turning
back of the hand upon the dial, while the laws of nature continue;
and outside the uniform operation of the laws of nature there is no
source, or mode, or continuance of solar energy conceivable. It is true
that when our system shall have ran down to its culmination in death,
other present systems may continue for a time to exist and new ones
spring into being; but these, too, must inevitably follow the same
course, and likewise end in eternal darkness, until finally the great
experiment of creation shall have ended in eternal failure. The changes
we see in progress around us, however, are not of this nature. The
individual dies, but the forces which gave life and strength to the
race persist, and others will take his place, and the same forces will
continue to operate with constant renewals, since we draw our light
and heat and life from without; but in the death of suns and their
attendant planets there is no analogous process, for such suns are
constantly expending their enormous energies in the support of life
external to themselves, and only the smallest part of this energy,
even, can ever be utilized by themselves or by other suns or planets
under any mode of interpretation now in vogue, the boundless realms
of so-called inert and empty space receiving the same proportionate
quota of light and heat as the almost microscopic points in the sky
which constitute the suns and systems we see, and practically all,
or nearly all, of this enormous energy is an absolute dead waste; so
that whether receiving new supplies from a constant rain of adjacent
meteor streams, or from the gradual contraction of the solar volume,
the vast realms of space are the useless recipients of what can never
return to the sun again, and, of course, in such case the inevitable
end can be predicted; for contraction of volume, with a given mass,
must have an effective limit, and meteoric aggregation must also find
an effective limit, if the planets are not to be thrown out of place
as they continue to revolve around the sun.

All accepted theories begin with a primordial impulse, the energies
of which are of necessity constantly frittered away and wasted,
until finally all light and heat and life must cease to exist,
and that at a stage in which no further impulse can ever be given,
since the whole universe will have passed through every possible
stage of degradation down to the final one of universal and eternal
death. And yet this is the best that science has to suggest; the only
comfort offered us is that it will not happen in our time, and so,
"after us the deluge." The nebular hypothesis, so called, of Laplace,
has required much modification, in the light of more recent science,
but the essential principles of this theory are still generally
accepted, for they fairly well account for the primal connection of
the sun and planets, and the position of the central sun within,
with the orbital and rotational planetary movements, as no other
theory has yet done. By this theory the limits of our solar system
were once occupied by an attenuated gaseous nebula containing within
itself all the matter which now forms our solar system. This great
nebular mass, primordially assumed, was given by gravity a slow but
gradually increasing rotation upon its center; the force of gravity
acted more strongly upon this rotating body as it contracted, so
that rings of nebulous matter were successively thrown off, which
coalesced into single masses and these finally into planets. These
planetary globes themselves, as they coalesced and contracted, left
behind or threw off rings of their outer matter, which, in turn,
became moons, and finally our solar system with its central sun was
evolved as we now see it; development continued, the planets cooled
and condensed, life appeared when the conditions became suitable,
and the original progressive condensation of the central mass--the
sun--still continuing, the evolution of light and heat continues,
and will continue in a correlative degree. As our moon has passed,
apparently, beyond the stage of life, and is cold, airless, waterless,
and dead, so will the earth pass; and the larger planets, such as
Jupiter and Saturn, which have not yet reached the life stage of
condensation, are still hot, but they, too, will pass through the
present stage of the earth, then through that in which the moon now
is; and the central sun, still glowing, but more and more dimly, will
itself pass through the stages in which Jupiter and Saturn now are,
then through that of our present earth, and finally into that of the
moon, long before which time the emission of all light and heat will
have ceased from the sun to its encircling planets, and finally the
sun itself will sink into eternal frigidity, and all its store of
light and heat will have been dissipated into boundless space, and
the possibility of anything resembling what we know as life will have
been forever extinguished. In considering the question of the sun's
energy, the author of the article "Sun," in Appleton's Cyclopædia,
says, "How to account for the supply of the prodigious amount of heat
constantly radiated from the solar surface has offered a boundless
field of hypothesis. One conjecture is that the sun is now giving
off the heat imparted to it at its creation, and that it is gradually
cooling down (1). Another ascribed it to combustion (2), and a third
to currents of electricity (3). Newton and Buffon conjectured that
comets might be the aliment of the sun (4); and of late years a
somewhat similar theory (first broached by Mr. Waterston in 1853)
has been in vogue,--viz., that a stream of meteoric matter constantly
pouring into the sun from the regions of space supplies its heat,
by the conversion into it of the arrested motion (5). As the sun may,
indeed, derive a small amount of heat from this cause, it deserves more
attention than previous conjectures. But conjecture and hypothesis
may be said to have given place to views which claim a higher title,
as it is now becoming generally recognized, in accordance with modern
physical theories of heat, that in the gravitation of the sun's mass
toward its center, and in its consequent condensation, sufficient
heat must be evolved to supply the present radiation, enormous as this
undoubtedly is. It appears to be susceptible of full demonstration that
a contraction of the sun's volume of a given definite amount, which
is yet so slight as to be invisible to the most powerful telescope,
is competent to furnish a heat-supply equal to all that can have been
emitted during historical periods. According to this theory, then
(which is largely due to the development by Helmholtz of Mayer's
great generalization), the sun's mass remains unaltered, and its
temperature nearly constant, while its size is slowly diminishing as
it contracts; so slowly, however, that the supply may be reckoned on
through periods almost infinite as measured by the known past of our
race, and which are in any case to be counted by millions of years
(6)." To these must be added the hypothesis of Dr. Siemens, fully
described in Professor Proctor's "Mysteries of Time and Space." This
ingenious theory, in brief, is that the rotation of the sun on its axis
causes a suction in the manner of a fan, at the poles, and a tangential
projection, at the equator, of a disk-like stream of gaseous matter
into space. The light and heat of the sun, dispersed through space,
slowly but continuously act upon the compound gases with which space
is universally pervaded to disassociate them into their elements. The
disassociated gases thus sucked in at the solar poles at an extremely
low temperature are brought into a state of combustion by friction
and condensation, thus generating new supplies of light and heat, and
the gases thus reunited by combustion are again projected into space,
to be again slowly disassociated by the operation of the sun's light
and heat. The result of this combustion is to form aqueous vapor and
carbonic acid and carbonic oxide, and these gases, when disassociated
in space, are resolved into carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, which again
and again are thus recombined and again and again decomposed as they
pass over the sun's surface (7).

The seven hypotheses above described are the only ones now in vogue,
and a brief analysis will show that no single one of them, nor all
combined, will give sufficient results to account for the essential
difficulties or known conditions of the problem. The first and second
hypotheses are answered by the fact set forth by Helmholtz (Popular
Scientific Lectures, article "On the Origin of the Planetary System"),
that, if the mass of the sun were composed of the two elements capable
by combination of producing the greatest possible light and heat,--to
wit, hydrogen and oxygen in the proportions in which they unite to
form water,--"calculation shows that under the above supposition the
heat resulting from their combustion would be sufficient to keep up
the radiation of heat from the sun three thousand and twenty-one
years. That, it is true, is a long time, but even profane history
teaches that the sun has lighted and warmed us for three thousand
years, and geology puts it beyond doubt that this period must be
extended to millions of years."

The third hypothesis relates to currents of electricity. We have no
knowledge of currents of electricity which could produce, however
multiplied or intensified, such light and heat as are constantly
poured forth from the sun into all space. That electricity is the
intermediate cause of our sun's energy, and of all solar energy, it
is the purpose of this work to demonstrate, but not electric currents,
which find their attractiveness to theorists in the vague suggestion of
which Professor Proctor speaks, referring to comets, in his article on
"Cometic Mysteries," "that perhaps this is an electrical phenomenon;
perhaps that other feature is electrical, too; perhaps all or most
of the phenomena of comets depend on electricity." But he adds, "It
is so easy to make such suggestions, so difficult to obtain evidence
in their favor having the slightest scientific value. Still, I hold
the electrical idea to be well worth careful study. Whatever credit
may hereafter be given to any electrical theory of comets will be
solely and entirely due to those who may help to establish it upon
a basis of sound evidence,--none whatever to the mere suggestion,
which has been made time and again since it was first advanced by
Fontanelle." It will be seen that the present work, in demonstrating
the true source and mode of solar energy, in itself presents a full
and sufficient explanation of all the cometic mysteries referred to,
as well as all those pertaining to other solar systems in space, and
the multifarious phenomena which they present. Indeed, the philosophic
mind will not be satisfied with the sufficiency of any hypothesis
which will not unlock the mysteries and clearly explain the phenomena
of other systems,--of comets, variable and temporary stars, double
stars, and all the complicated celestial economy which to the eye
of the mere observer presents a bewildering scene of the operation
of independent and inscrutable forces. The fifth hypothesis cited,
that of meteoric impact, doubtless plays a part, as we know from the
generation of light and heat by the constant passage of similar bodies
through our own atmosphere. And we know, of course, that the sun, by
its vastly-increased attraction, must be subjected to the constant
impact of such meteoric bodies in enormous numbers. But the fatal
defect in the theory is that such impacts, to produce the radiant
energy of the sun, must constantly add to its mass in like proportion,
and as the motions and distances of the planets in their orbits are
regulated and preserved by virtue of the substantially constant mass
of the sun, any progressive and considerable increase in its mass must
constantly bring the planets nearer and nearer, and thus increase
their orbital velocity. Helmholtz quotes from Sir William Thomson's
investigation, that, "assuming it to hold, the mass of the sun should
increase so rapidly that the consequences would have shown themselves
in the accelerated motion of the planets. The entire loss of heat from
the sun cannot, at all events, be produced in this way; at the most a
portion, which, however, may not be inconsiderable." R. Kalley Miller,
in "The Romance of Astronomy," says, "But more recent observations
have led Sir William Thomson to a modification of his theory. He
has calculated that if the meteoric shower were sufficiently heavy
to make up for the sun's whole expenditure of heat, the matter
of the corona must be so dense as seriously to perturb the orbits
of certain comets which pass very close to his surface,--a result
which is found not to be the case. But the meteoric theory is only
thrown back a step. If the sun's mass were originally formed, as is
not at all improbable, by the agglomeration of these particles, Sir
William Thomson has calculated that the heat generated by their thus
falling together would be sufficient to account for a supply of twenty
million years of solar heat at the present rate of emission. And thus,
though the meteors are not sufficient to maintain the energy of our
system unimpaired, they may yet have been the original storehouse
from which all that energy was derived.... But if the economy of our
system be spared long enough, the day must come when the sun with age
has become wan; when the matter of the corona has all been drawn in
and used up without avail; when the lavish luxuriance with which he
has showered abroad his light and heat has finally exhausted all his
stores. He has still power, aided by the resisting medium, to drag his
satellites one by one down upon his surface; and the shock of each
successive impact will, for a brief period, give him a fresh tenure
of life. When the earth crashes into the sun it will supply him with
a store of heat for nearly a century, while Jupiter's large mass will
extend the period by nearly thirty thousand years. But when the last
of the planets is swallowed up, the sun's energies will rapidly die
out and a deep and deathly gloom gather about nature's grave. Looking
into the ages of a future eternity, we can see nothing but a cold
and burnt-out mass remaining of that glorious orb which went forth
in the morning of time, joyful as a bridegroom from his chamber,
and rejoicing as a strong man to run a race."

The sixth hypothesis is that to which most credence is now given. It
is that of evolution of energy by condensation of volume. Professor
Proctor ("The Sun as a Perpetual Machine") says, "In company with this
great mystery of seeming waste comes the yet more difficult problem,
how to explain the apparent continuance of solar light and heat during
millions of years. We know from the results of geological research
that the earth has been exposed to the action of the solar rays with
their present activity during at least a hundred million years. Yet it
is difficult to see how, on any hypothesis of the generation of solar
heat, or by combining together all possible modes of heat generation,
a supply for more than twenty millions of years in the past and a
possible supply for as long a period in the future can be accounted
for." Of these vast periods of terrestrial existence in the past we
quote the following from a recent publication:

"Professor C. D. Wolcott expresses the opinion that geologic time
is not to be measured by hundreds of years, but simply by tens of
millions. This is widely different from the conclusion arrived at
by Sir Charles Lyell, who, basing his estimate on modifications of
certain specimens of marine life, assigned 240,000,000 years as the
required geological period; Darwin claimed 200,000,000 years; Crowell,
about 72,000,000; Geike, from 73,000,000 upward; McGee, Upham, and
other recent authorities claim from 100,000,000 up to 680,000,000."

Helmholtz ("On the Origin of the Planetary System") says, "It is
probable rather that a great part of this heat, which was produced by
condensation, began to radiate into space before this condensation
was complete. But the heat which the sun could have previously
developed by its condensation would have been sufficient to cover
its present expenditure for not less than 22,000,000 of years of the
past.... We may therefore assume with great probability that the sun
will still continue in its condensation, even if it only attained the
density of the earth, though it will probably become far denser in
its interior, owing to its far greater pressure; this would develop
fresh quantities of heat, which would be sufficient to maintain for
an additional 17,000,000 of years the same intensity of sunshine
as that which is now the source of all terrestrial life." Of this
process of condensation Professor Ball, in his recent work, "In
the High Heavens," says, "It goes without saying that the welfare
of the human race is necessarily connected with the continuance
of the sun's beneficent action. We have indeed shown that the few
other direct or indirect sources of heat which might conceivably
be relied upon are in the very nature of things devoid of necessary
permanence. It becomes, therefore, of the utmost interest to inquire
whether the sun's heat can be calculated on indefinitely. Here is
indeed a subject which is literally of the most vital importance,
so far as organic life is concerned. If the sun shall ever cease
to shine, then it must be certain that there is a term beyond which
human existence, or indeed organic existence of any type whatever,
cannot any longer endure on the earth. We may say once for all that
the sun contains just a certain number of units of heat, actual or
potential, and that he is at the present moment shedding that heat
around with the most appalling extravagance." Quoting from Professor
Langley, he says, "We feel certain that the incessant radiation
from the sun must be producing a profound effect on its stores of
energy. The only way of reconciling this with the total absence of
evidence of the expected changes is to be found in the supposition
that such is the mighty mass of the sun, such the prodigious supply
of heat or what is the equivalent of heat which it contains, that
the grand transformation through which it is passing proceeds at a
rate so slow that, during the ages accessible to our observations,
the results achieved have been imperceptible.... We cannot, however,
attribute to the sun any miraculous power of generating heat. That
great body cannot disobey those laws which we have learned from
experiments in our laboratories. Of course no one now doubts that the
great law of the conservation of energy holds good. We do not in the
least believe that because the sun's heat is radiated away in such
profusion it is therefore entirely lost. It travels off, no doubt,
to the depths of space, and as to what may become of it there we have
no information. Everything we know points to the law that energy is
as indestructible as matter itself. The heat scattered from the sun
exists at least as ethereal vibration, if in no other form. But it
is most assuredly true that this energy, so copiously dispensed, is
lost to our solar system. There is no form in which it is returned,
or in which it can be returned. The energy of the system is as surely
declining as the store of energy of the clock declines according as
the weight runs down. In the clock, however, the energy is restored
by winding up the weight, but there is no analogous process known in
our system." The purpose of the present work, however, is to clearly
demonstrate that just such a process is actually being carried on, and
has been so carried on from the beginning, and will be forever. This
writer continues reviewing the suppositions formerly entertained,
that the sun was a heated body gradually cooling down, or that it
was undergoing absolute combustion, and shows that they were utterly
insufficient. He then refers to the theory of meteoric supply, of
which he says, "It can, however, be shown that there are not enough
meteors in existence to supply a sufficient quantity of heat to the
sun to compensate the loss by radiation. The indraught of meteoric
matter may, indeed, certainly tend in some small degree to retard the
ultimate cooling of the great luminary, but its effect is so small
that we can quite afford to overlook it from the point of view that we
are taking in these pages. It is to Helmholtz we are indebted for the
true solution of the long-vexed problem. He has demonstrated in the
clearest manner where the source of the sun's heat lies.... A gaseous
globe like the sun, when it parts with its heat, observes laws of a
very different type from those which a cooling solid follows. As the
heat disappears by radiation the body contracts; the gaseous object,
however, decreases in general much more than a solid body would do for
the same loss of heat.... The globe of gas unquestionably radiates heat
and loses it, and the globe, in consequence of that loss, shrinks to
a smaller size.... In the facts just mentioned we have an explanation
of the sustained heat of the sun. Of course we cannot assume that
in our calculations the sun is to be treated as if it were gaseous
throughout its entire mass, but it approximates so largely to the
gaseous state in the greater part of its bulk that we can feel no
hesitation in adopting the belief that the true cause has been found."

Regarding the constitution of the sun, it may be stated, however,
that we only see its photosphere, which is the visible sun, and
the whole volume has a density about that of water; but no man
has ever seen the body of the sun itself. In this respect it is
like the planet Jupiter: we only know that its density cannot be
less than one-fourth the density of the earth's solid globe. If
the photosphere extend to a depth of one thousand, ten thousand,
or a hundred thousand miles, the density of the sun's body or core
will be correspondingly increased. Even computing the whole visible
volume, the density is far greater than that of any gas we know, even
with the solar pressure of gravity; with the sun's metallic vapors,
if the whole core were already vaporized, we would not, to say the
least, be likely to observe the sun-spots and other solar phenomena
as we find them actually to occur; this, however, will be more fully
considered later on. The author continues, "But there is a boundary
to the prospect of the continuance of the sun's radiation. Of course,
as the loss of heat goes on the gaseous parts will turn into liquids,
and as the process is still further protracted the liquids will
transform into solids. Thus, we look forward to a time when the
radiation of the sun can be no longer carried on in conformity with
the laws which dictate the loss of heat from a gaseous body. When this
state is reached the sun may, no doubt, be an incandescent solid with
a brilliance as great as is compatible with that condition, but the
further loss of heat will then involve loss of temperature.... There
seems no escape from the conclusion that the continuous loss of solar
heat must still go on, so that the sun will pass through the various
stages of brilliant incandescence, of glowing redness, of dull redness,
until it ultimately becomes a dark and non-luminous star.... There
is thus a distinct limit to man's existence on the earth, dictated
by the ultimate exhaustion of the sun.... The utmost amount of heat
that it would ever have been possible for the sun to contain would,
according to this authority (Professor Langley), supply its radiation
for eighteen million years at the present rate.... It seems that the
sun has already dissipated about four-fifths of the energy with which
it may have originally been endowed. At all events, it seems that,
radiating energy at its present rate, the sun may hold out for four
million years or for five million years, but not for ten million
years.... We have seen that it does not seem possible for any other
source of heat to be available for replenishing the waning stores of
the luminary." He concludes by saying that the original heat may have
been imparted as the result of some great collision, the solar body
having itself been dark before the collision occurred, and that it
may be reinvigorated by a repetition of a similar startling process,
but indicates in general terms that such an operation would be bad
for the round world and all contained therein. It would, in fact,
be rough treatment for even a hopeless case.

Condensation of the solar volume is unquestionably a source of heat,
for we know that the solid or liquid interior of the earth increases
in temperature at a definite ratio as we descend through its crust;
but long before the sun shall have become contracted to the density of
the earth all its heat will have become substantially internal heat,
and it can then supply no more by radiation to its surrounding planets.

It will be seen that the radiant energy of the sun on any of the above
hypotheses is not sufficient to account even for the life period of the
earth in the past, and that its future period of energy must be still
more brief. Professor Ball ("In the High Heavens"), basing his views
on Laplace's "Nebular Hypothesis," says, "Looking back into the remote
ages, we thus see that the sun was larger and larger the further back
we project our view. If we go sufficiently far back, we seem to come
to a time when the sun, in a more or less completely gaseous state,
filled up the surrounding space out to the orbit of Mercury, or,
earlier still, out to the orbit of the remotest planet." According
to this hypothesis, all these brilliant suns, the author says, will
"settle down into dark bodies like the earth," and that "every analogy
would teach us that the dark and non-luminous bodies in the universe
are far more numerous than the brilliant suns. We can never see the
dark objects; we can discern their presence only indirectly. All the
stars that we can see are merely those bodies which at this epoch
of their career happen for the time to be so highly heated as to be
luminous.... It may happen that there are dark bodies in the vicinity
of some of the bright stars to which these stars act as illuminants,
just in the same way as the sun disperses light to the planets." One
would naturally suppose, however, that there must be some sort of
laws to govern such stupendous operations, and that nature is not
merely engaged in blowing bubbles. To quote Professor Newcomb: "At the
present time we can only say that the nebular hypothesis is indicated
by the general tendencies of the laws of nature; that it has not been
proved to be inconsistent with any fact; that it is almost a necessary
consequence of the only theory by which we can account for the origin
and conservation of the sun's heat; but that it rests on the assumption
that this conservation is to be explained by the laws of nature as
we now see them in operation. Should any one be sceptical as to the
sufficiency of these laws to account for the present state of things,
science can furnish no evidence strong enough to overthrow his doubts
until the sun shall be found growing smaller by actual measurement,
or the nebulæ be actually seen to condense into stars and systems."

While the validity of the views set forth in the present volume
does not depend on the sufficiency or insufficiency of the nebular
hypothesis, and in fact requires the condensation as well as the
expansion of the solar volume under the influence of heat to be
recognized and its extreme importance pointed out, yet it must not
be supposed that this great generalization of Kant and Laplace,
based on the views presented originally by Sir William Herschel, is
established, or that the difficulties in its way are not so enormous
as to be almost insuperable. Professor Ball points out that thousands
of bodies occupy our solar system, and together compose it as a whole;
that these have orbits of every sort of eccentricity and direction,
and occupying all possible planes which can pass through the sun; that
the bodies circle around the sun, some backward and others forward,
and that only the planets seem to conform to some common order; and
without this order, which may be accidental, so far as our knowledge
goes, the system would have been disrupted long since, if it ever
could have begun its operations; and that in this view the heavens
may be strewn with wrecks of systems which failed to survive from
inherent want of harmony,--that is to say, as based on observation
only. Whether the nebular hypothesis be a universal or a partial law
of development, or whether the real processes be quite different,
cannot, however, depend on the continued maintenance and evolution
of the sun's energy, as this source must in truth be sought for in
quite a different direction.

The remaining hypothesis (the seventh) is considered in detail in
Professor Proctor's work, "Mysteries of Time and Space." The fatal
defect in Dr. Siemens's theory is, that his gases will not be projected
from the sun's equator. Professor Proctor says, "Thus the centripetal
tendency of matter at the sun's equator is very much greater (many
hundreds of times greater) than its centrifugal tendency, and there
is not the slightest possibility of matter being projected into space
from the sun's surface by centrifugal tendency. Nor is there any part
of the sun's mass where the centrifugal tendency is greater than at
the surface near the equator. So that, whatever else the sun may be
doing to utilize his mighty energies, he is certainly not throwing
off matter constantly from his equatorial regions, as Dr. Siemens's
theory requires." There are other difficulties which Professor Proctor
considers, such as the doubt as to the power of the sun's rays to
disassociate combined gases in space, and also that, since both light
and heat must be utilized in this work, if the sun's energies are to
be perpetually renewed, these forces would sensibly disappear in work,
and the result would be that the fixed stars would be invisible beyond
their domains, and their light, when not totally cut off, would be
greatly diminished, in any event, as distances increased, which is
not the case. Besides, these gases thus disassociated could never be
entirely used by the sun, and the remainder would be wasted, and the
part wasted would vastly exceed that utilized, probably in as great
proportion of waste as that of the sun's light not utilized by the
planets, which gather but one two-hundred-and-thirty-two-millionths
of the whole. It may be further added that these gases would be
mechanically mixed, the combined and the disassociated, and this
would be mostly the case in those parts nearest the sun, so that large
volumes of spent and useless gases would have to be carried in to no
purpose whatever. In fact, these gases would gradually form a closed
circuit of supply and discharge, and surrounding space would be but
slightly affected. Professor Proctor concludes, "We have, in fact,
the fallacy of perpetual motion in a modified form."

It will be apparent that under any single one, or all, of these
hypotheses, the future prospect for created forms and continued
existence is hopeless, and that the inevitable result must do
violence to every conception of either an intelligent creative
power or the operations of universal law. The mind revolts from
the continued degradation and destruction of all organic creation,
while the malevolent and iconoclastic forces of nature hold high
revel over final ruin and eternal destruction, brought about by their
own incessant efforts, striking out blindly to make or mar, and they
alone the deathless survivors, the half-blind fates and furies of the
eternal future. It betokens, not the processes of orderly government,
but the reign of anarchy.

Note.--Since this work has been in press, at the annual meeting of the
British Association, August 8, 1894, Lord Salisbury, the President,
delivered a powerful and lucid address on the present status of
scientific knowledge and its limitations. With reference to the
antiquity of the earth we quote the following: "It is evident,
from the increase of heat as we descend into the earth, that the
earth is cooling, and we know, by experiment within certain wide
limits, the rate at which its substances--the matters of which it is
constituted--are found to cool. It follows that we can approximately
calculate how hot it was so many million years ago; but if at any
time it was hotter at the surface by fifty degrees Fahrenheit than it
is now, life would then have been impossible upon the planet, and,
therefore, we can without much difficulty fix a date before which
organic life on earth cannot have existed. Basing himself on these
considerations, Lord Kelvin limited the period of organic life upon
the earth to a hundred million years, and Professor Tait, in a still
more penurious spirit, cut that hundred down to ten." If a period of
anything like ten million years, even, has been requisite to cool the
earth's surface only fifty degrees in temperature, what time must have
elapsed since the terrestrial globe had a temperature high enough to
effect the difficult chemical combinations of many of the elements
which compose its structure? And even this must have been far less
than the vast cycles of time during which original consolidation was
effected. Through all these ages the sun must have been pouring out
his radiant energy at at least his present rate. Radiation of heat
from the earth may have been relatively less rapid from a denser
carbon-laden atmosphere in times past than at present, but it never
could have been more so. The whole address cited is, indeed, strongly
corroborative of the facts upon which the present work is based.








CHAPTER II.

THE CONSTITUTION AND PHENOMENA OF THE SUN.


The various theories thus reviewed, while not sufficient in themselves
to account for the facts of our own solar system, are fatally defective
in another respect. While they aim to account for the sun's light
and heat, they all fail to consider the active medium of the solar
light and heat in the sun itself. It is not simply a highly-heated
central mass glowing in space. It is a vast orb surrounded by
different envelopes of incandescent vapors or gases, and by far
the most vast in volume, as well as in light and heat-radiating
power, are the photosphere and its superincumbent chromosphere,
composed almost entirely of free hydrogen gas in a state of intense
incandescence. Whence comes this enormous mass of hydrogen? And
how explain the entire absence of free hydrogen gas from our own
atmosphere and its replacement by oxygen? There is a recent theory
propounded by Mr. A. Mott, which is set forth in detail in Professor
Ball's "In the High Heavens," and which endeavors to account for the
remarkable absence of free hydrogen gas from the earth's atmosphere,
for, as the author states, "It is a singular fact that hydrogen in
the free state is absent from our atmosphere." The theory, in brief,
is that the molecules of hydrogen gas have an average speed of about a
mile a second,--which, however, is only one-seventh that required to
shoot them off into space,--but that these molecules are continually
changing their velocity, and may sometimes attain a speed of seven
miles a second; the result is that "every now and then a molecule
of hydrogen succeeds in bolting away from the earth altogether
and escaping into open space." During past ages the molecules of
hydrogen would thus have gradually wiggled up through the air, and
finally disappeared into outer darkness for good and all; and thus
"the fact that there is at present no free hydrogen in the air over
our heads may be accounted for." Since the molecules of oxygen have
only a velocity of a quarter mile a second, that unfortunate gas
remains behind and is consumed.

The first difficulty with this theory is to explain how, if the
hydrogen wiggled off in this unceremonious manner, it ever wiggled
on. There is no objection to a gait of this rapidity, however; it
is highly creditable, in fact; but we have a right to expect some
degree of consistency in even so light-headed a body as hydrogen
gas. The article quoted thus continues: "If the mass of the earth
were very much larger than it is, then the velocities with which
the molecules of hydrogen wend their way would never be sufficiently
high to enable them to quit the earth altogether, and consequently we
might in such a case expect to find our atmosphere largely charged with
hydrogen." It will be seen that, according to this theory, hydrogen is
able to achieve a speed of seven miles per second under exceptional
excitement, and that this molecular velocity is just enough, and no
more than enough, to give it egress. We know that Jupiter's mass is
three hundred times as great as that of the earth, and the attraction
of gravity is so powerful on the surface of that planet that, as the
writer just quoted says, "Walking, or even standing, would involve the
most fearful exertion, while rising from bed in the morning would be a
difficult, indeed, probably, an impossible, process." We also know that
the atmosphere of this planet is laden with enormous clouds floating
at various altitudes and with incessant movements. We are told that
"the molecular speed of aqueous vapor averages only one-third of that
attained by the molecules of hydrogen." Of course, on the planet
Jupiter, hydrogen would have no chance of escape at all: it would
just have to stay and take it, like the rest of us. Jupiter must thus
have an atmosphere like our own, except that it is "largely charged
with hydrogen." Of the clouds upon this planet, Professor Ball says,
"In fact, the longer we look at Jupiter the more we become convinced
that the surface of the planet is swathed with a mighty volume of
clouds so dense and so impenetrable that our most powerful telescopes
have never yet been able to pierce through them down to the solid
surface of the planet." With the densities, molecular velocities,
and specific gravity of the oxygen, nitrogen, and the hydrogen, with
which latter the atmosphere of Jupiter must be "largely charged," as
it is said, it is difficult to understand how such enormous clouds
of aqueous vapors, themselves composed of oxygen, which is a very
slow-footed gas, and hydrogen, could travel about with such facility;
we ought to find them packed down like London fog, to say the least,
upon the surface of that planet, with the supernatant gases all
adrift overhead. Jupiter is a hot body; it has not yet cooled down;
and if it is provided with volcanoes, such as its great red spot and
the analogies of the earth and moon would suggest, we can tell pretty
nearly what would have happened long ago with a Jovian atmosphere like
ours; but "largely charged with hydrogen," if we compare it with,
say, an equal mass of dynamite touched off by a volcanic explosion;
there would not have been enough of old Jupiter left to swear by, and
what was left would not have had any atmosphere at all. On Mars, the
same writer thinks the oxygen would still cling, like the fragrance of
the rose, but that all the molecules of the fleet-footed and excitable
hydrogen would long since have taken French leave, as it did from the
earth; but at the moon, on account of its small size and mass, both
gases would have gone off incontinently together. "It is now easy,"
the author says, "to account for the absence of atmosphere from the
moon.... Neither of the gases, oxygen or nitrogen, to say nothing of
hydrogen, could possibly exist in the free state on a globe of the
mass and dimensions of our satellite.... Indeed, the weight of every
object on the moon would be reduced to the sixth part of that which
the same object has on earth." Nevertheless, it may be said that
the moon has considerable weight, as weights go, but with a comet
it is quite a different matter. "These bodies," the author says,
"demonstrate conclusively that the quantity of matter even in a
comet is extremely small when compared with its bulk. The conclusion
thus arrived at is confirmed by the fact that our efforts to obtain
the weight of a comet have hitherto proved unsuccessful.... It has
thus been demonstrated that, notwithstanding the stupendous bulk of
a great comet, its mass must have been so inconsiderable as to have
been insufficient to disturb even such unimportant members of the
solar system as the satellites of Jupiter." Now, here is a state of
things; for the spectroscope shows that comets are fully provided with
a large supply of hydrogen, enough and to spare for ornament, even,
and of nitrogen also, while it is the abnormally fugacious oxygen
which has, apparently, taken its departure. Of course, such facts
demonstrate the untenability of the theory, which is, besides, in
direct contradiction with the laws governing gaseous diffusion. Gases
pass into each other with the same velocity as into a vacuum, and
it is not to be imagined that the molecules of hydrogen could thus
move individually off, unless forced upward by the pressure of some
other gas, which the law of gaseous diffusion makes impossible. We
should as readily expect to see a tumbler full of iron balls, into
the interstices of which loose sand has been poured, manifest a
similar phenomenon by the wiggling out of the less dense sand at the
top of the glass. One might also ask whence, if this theory had any
substantial basis, could come the enormous volumes of hydrogen gas
in the atmosphere of a new or temporary star, in a few hours, or the
changes manifested in the atmospheres of the variable stars. So, also,
the nebular or any other hypothesis of creation would be impossible
under this theory, as the heavier and less mobile gaseous elements
would remain behind, or be condensed nearest the center of gravity of
the aggregating nebula, while the more rapid gases would disappear
outwardly, and in consequence the sun would be found to be composed
of the heavier elements exclusively, and each of the planets, in
turn, would consist of only one or two elements, in accordance with
the more and more mobile character of their molecular movements, and
the uniformity of chemical constitution between the sun and planets,
as well as the fixed stars, would not be found to exist. The theory,
in fact, is an example of the endeavor to explain an easily understood
difficulty by a less easily understood impossibility.

None of the different theories even attempt to account for the
prodigious volumes of hydrogen in the solar atmosphere, and without its
presence the sun, so far as we know, would be almost an inert mass,
considered as a source of energy for the supply of our planetary
system. We know, of course, that meteors contain sometimes as much
as six volumes of gases, largely composed of hydrogen, at our own
atmospheric pressure. But the pressure at the sun's surface is more
than twenty-seven times that at the surface of the earth, and yet the
volume of hydrogen there existing visibly is vaster beyond computation
than any possible mass of meteoric material could supply. So, also,
while it may be granted that condensation of volume must vastly raise
the solar temperature, how could it produce the enormous masses of
hydrogen, the lightest of all the elements, unless they have been
temporarily occluded and finally thrown out from within, which is
impossible? These vast volumes of hydrogen are to be considered first
of all in any attempt whatever to solve the problem of the source
and mode of solar energy.

Considering the phenomena presented within the limits of our own solar
system alone, we find that the earth is one of a single family of
planets, each of which very closely resembles it, and all of which
circle, in slightly elliptical orbits, at various distances around
the sun, their orbits occupying substantially the same plane,
thus making our solar system a flat disk of space occupied by
the sun as a center, with the planets and their satellites moving
harmoniously around it. The planets differ from each other in size,
mass, and temperature, but each is surrounded by an envelope of
aqueous vapor, suspended in an atmosphere substantially like our
own. Professor Proctor, in his "Light Science for Leisure Hours,"
says of the planet Jupiter, "His real surface is always veiled by
his dense and vapor-laden atmosphere. Saturn, Venus, and Mercury
are similarly circumstanced." Of Mars he says that it is "distinctly
marked (in telescopes of sufficient power) with continents and oceans
which are rarely concealed by vapors." Now, whence comes this aqueous
vapor surrounding all the planets? Whether received originally from
the diffused nebular mass from which our solar system is supposed
to have been condensed, or attracted by the force of gravity from
interplanetary space, like the meteors which fall upon the earth's
surface, it is evident that interplanetary space must once have been
pervaded with aqueous vapor, since the nebular mass from which our
solar system was constituted must have occupied at least the space
embraced within its largest planetary orbit, and doubtless much more;
and if so, such aqueous vapor, and other vapors also, must still
persist in space, just as the meteoric particles which so constantly
manifest themselves in our atmosphere. If the planets had no common
origin, the evidence is equally conclusive, since then this identical
substance could only have been derived from a common source, which
can only be interplanetary space. This also is in accordance with
the laws of attraction, which would operate to gather and condense
the rarefied aqueous vapor of space around the planetary masses in
definite proportions. In his "Familiar Essays on Scientific Subjects,"
Professor Proctor says, "In fact, we do thus recognize in the spectra
of Mars, Venus, and other planets the presence of aqueous vapor in
their atmosphere;" and in his "Mysteries of Time and Space" he says,
"We may admit the possibility that the aqueous vapor and carbon
compounds are present in stellar or interplanetary space." But
in addition to this aqueous vapor which surrounds the planetary
bodies, we find free oxygen in vast quantities, and, with this, free
nitrogen in mechanical admixture, and these together constitute the
atmosphere we breathe, and which sustains organic life by a process
of slow combustion. But we find no free hydrogen either in our own
atmosphere or in that of other planets. Turning now to the sun, we
find that it is surrounded by an atmosphere as well as the planets,
but that this atmosphere is composed not of free oxygen, but of free
hydrogen. In his article, "Oxygen in the Sun," Professor Proctor says,
"Fourteen only of the elements known to us, or less than a quarter
of the total number, were thus found to be present in the sun's
constitution; and of these all were metals, if we regard hydrogen as
metallic.... But most remarkable of all, and most perplexing, was the
absence of all trace of oxygen and nitrogen, two gases which could
not be supposed wanting in the substance of the great ruling center
of the planetary system." The researches of Dr. Draper indicated,
however, that oxygen could be found in the sun; not in his external
atmosphere but far down within his surface. Professor Proctor says,
"Dr. Draper mentions that he has found no traces of oxygen above the
photosphere." Such free oxygen cannot be associated with the hydrogen,
however, even if its presence be finally determined, but it may be
due to the deoxidation of solid compounds precipitated upon the sun
from space, and held at a temperature above that of disassociation,
as hydrogen is sometimes generated at the surface of the earth.

The vast mass of the solar atmosphere is composed of hydrogen gas, with
which are found commingled vapors of the various elements which enter
into the sun's constitution, and this solar atmosphere corresponds
in proportion, speaking generally, with our own atmosphere, except
that the volume of solar hydrogen is vastly greater than that of
terrestrial oxygen, for the reason, as will be explained, that water
contains two volumes of the former to one of the latter.

In Appleton's Cyclopædia the sun is thus described, (article by
Professors Langley and Proctor): "To sum up briefly the received
hypotheses of the physical constitution of the sun: of its internal
structure we know nothing, but we can infer, from the low density of
the solar globe as a whole, that no considerable portion is solid or
liquid. The regions we examine appear to consist of cloud layers at
several levels floating in a complex atmosphere, in which probably
most of the elements are known to us, and certainly many of them
exist in the form of vapor. Outside this complex atmosphere extend
envelopes of simpler constitution, though into them occasionally
arise the vapors which ordinarily lie lower down. The sierra, for
instance, consists in the main of glowing hydrogen gas and that gas,
whatever it may be, which produces the line near the orange-yellow
sodium lines. The prominence region may be regarded as simply the
extension of the sierra." Of these prominences, Professor Ball says,
"The memorable discovery made by Janssen and Lockyer, independently, in
1868, showed that the prominences could be observed without the help of
an eclipse, by the happy employment of the peculiar refrangibility of
the rosy light which these prominences emit.... We can now obtain, not,
as heretofore, merely isolated views of special prominences through
the widely opened slit of the spectroscope, but we are furnished,
after a couple of minutes' exposure, with a complete photograph of
the prominences surrounding the sun.... The incandescent region of
the chromosphere from which these prominences arise is also recorded
with accuracy." Resuming our quotation from Appleton's Cyclopædia:
"The inner corona is still simpler than the sierra, so far as its
gaseous constitution is concerned; but here meteoric and cometic matter
appears, extending to the outer corona and to great distances beyond
even the visible limits of the zodiacal. Returning to the photosphere,
we find it subject to continual fluctuations, both from local causes
of agitation and from the subjacent vapor acting by its elasticity to
burst through it; the faculæ, which are found to be above the general
level of the photosphere, are taken to be heapings up of the luminous
matter like the crested surges of the sea. All the strata are subject
to great movements, which sometimes have the character of uniform
progression analogous to our trade-winds, and sometimes are violent,
and resemble in their effects our tornadoes and whirlwinds. Eruptive
action appears to operate from time to time with exceeding violence,
but whether the enormous velocities of outrush are due to true
explosive action (which would compel us to believe that the sun is
enclosed by a liquid shell, so as to resemble a gigantic bubble) or to
the uprising of lighter vapors from enormous depths, as heated currents
rise in our own atmosphere, is not as yet certainly known." The
sierra, or chromosphere, is thus described in the same article:
"The sierra presents four aspects: 1, smooth with defined outline;
2, smooth but with no defined outline; 3, fringed with filaments;
and, 4, irregularly fringed with small flames. The prominences may
be divided into three orders,--heaps, jets, and plumes. The heaped
prominences need no special description. The jets ... originate
generally in rectilinear jets either vertical or oblique, very bright
and very well defined. They rise to a great height, often to a height
of at least eighty thousand miles, and occasionally to more than twice
that; then bending back, fall again upon the sun like the jets of our
fountains. Then they spread into figures resembling gigantic trees
more or less rich in branches. Their luminosity is intense, insomuch
that they can be seen through the light clouds into which the sierra
breaks up. Their spectrum indicates the presence of many elements
besides hydrogen. When they have reached a certain height they cease
to grow, and become transformed into exceedingly bright masses, which
eventually separate into fleecy clouds. The jet prominences last but
a short time--rarely an hour, frequently but a few minutes,--and they
are only to be seen in the neighborhood of the spots. Wherever there
are jet prominences there also are faculæ. The plume prominences are
distinguished from the jets in not being characterized by any signs of
an eruptive origin. They often extend to an enormous height; they last
longer than the jets, though subject to rapid changes of figure; and,
lastly, they are distributed indifferently over the sun's surface. It
would seem that in the jets a part of the photosphere is lifted up,
whereas in the case of plumes only the sierra is disturbed." Of these
eruptions Professor Ball says, "Vast masses of vapors are frequently
expelled from the interior of the sun by convulsive throes with a
speed of three hundred, four hundred, and sometimes nearly a thousand
miles a second.... The spectroscope enables the observer actually to
witness the ascent of these solar prominences."

The corona, which extends beyond the chromosphere, has been determined
by its continuous spectrum to be a vast envelope extending at
least a million miles from the sun's surface. "It cannot be a solar
atmosphere," Professor Proctor observes in his article on this subject,
in his "Mysteries of Time and Space."... "It will be seen, then,
how inconceivably great the pressure exerted by a solar atmosphere
some eight thousand times as deep as ours would necessarily be,
let the nature of the gases composing it be what it may."... "If a
man could be placed on the solar surface, his own weight would crush
him as effectually as though while on earth a weight of a couple of
tons were heaped upon him.... Now, it happens that we know quite well
that the pressure exerted by the real solar atmosphere, even close
by the bright surface which forms the visible globe of the sun, is
nothing like so great as it would be if the corona formed part of
that atmosphere." In the article "Sun," in Appleton's Cyclopædia,
it is stated that "Mr. Arthur W. Wright, of Yale College, has
succeeded in showing that this light (the zodiacal) is not emitted
from incandescent gas, but reflected from particles or small bodies,
and hence derived from the sun."... "There is reason to believe that
the true solar corona extends much farther (than a million miles),
and that, in reality, the zodiacal light forms the outer part of the
solar corona." Proctor, again, in his article on the corona, says,
"It would seem to follow that the corona is due to bodies of some sort
travelling around the sun, and by their motion preserved either from
falling towards him (in which case the corona would quickly disappear)
or from producing any pressure upon his surface, as an atmosphere
would." In his article on "The Sun as a Perpetual Machine," he says,
"There is every reason for regarding the zodiacal as consisting in
the main of meteorolithic masses, a sort of cosmical dust, rushing
through interplanetary space with planetary velocities. To such
matter, assuming, as we well may, that space really is occupied
by attenuated vapors, ... the luminosity of the zodiacal would be
attributable to particles of dust emitting light reflected by the sun
or by phosphorescence (this last may be seriously questioned). But
there is another cause for luminosity of these particles which may
deserve a passing consideration. Each particle would be electrified
by gaseous friction in its acceleration, and its electric tension
would be vastly increased in its forcible removal, in the same way
as the fine dust of the desert has been observed by Werner Siemens
to be in a state of high electrification on the apex of the Cheops
Pyramid. Would not the zodiacal light also find explanation by slow
electric discharges backward from the dust towards the sun?" It may be
observed in passing that such electrical glow is much more prominently,
and more likely to be, the result of induction than of friction. In
the article "Sun," previously quoted, Professor Young says, "There is
surrounding the sun, beyond any further reasonable doubt, a mass of
self-luminous gaseous matter, whose spectrum is characterized by the
green line 1474 Kirchhoff. The precise extent of this it is hardly
possible to consider as determined, but it must be many times the
thickness of the red hydrogen portion of the sierra, perhaps, on an
average, 8' or 10', with occasional horns of twice that height. It
is not at all unlikely that it may even turn out to have no upper
limit, but to extend from the sun indefinitely into space." In the
same article the sun's apparent diameter is placed at about 32',
so that the thickness of the above gaseous envelope would be not
less than one-fourth the sun's diameter, or more than two hundred
thousand miles. This coronal envelope, extending out from the solar
body until gradually merged into the attenuated matter of space, has
a light so feeble that it can only be clearly observed during total
eclipse. Professor Ball ("In the High Heavens") says, "The sunlight
is so intense that if it be reduced sufficiently by any artifice,
the coronal light also suffers so much abatement that, owing to its
initial feebleness, it ceases altogether to be visible." During the
great eclipse of 1893 it was photographed, and of these photographs
the same author says, "One of the most remarkable features in the
structure of the corona is the presence of streamers or luminous
rays extending from the north and south poles of the sun. These
rays are generally more or less curved, and it is doubtful whether
the phenomena they exhibit are not in some way a consequence of the
rotation of the sun. This consideration is connected with the question
as to how far the corona itself shares in that rotation of the sun
with which astronomers are familiar. I should perhaps rather have
said that rotation of the sun's photosphere which, as the sun-spots
prove, is accomplished once every twenty-five days. Even this shell
of luminous matter does not revolve as a rigid mass would do. By some
mysterious law the equatorial portions accomplish their revolution in
a shorter period than is required by those zones of the photosphere
which lie nearer the north and south poles of the luminary. As to how
the parts of the sun which are interior to the photosphere may revolve,
we are quite ignorant.... We have no means of knowing to what extent
the corona shares in the rotation. It would seem certain that the
lower parts which lie comparatively near the surface must be affected
by the rapid rotation of the photosphere; but it is very far from
certain that this rotation can be shared to any great extent by those
parts of the corona which lie at a distance from the sun's surface
as great as the solar radius or diameter.... The corona presents a
curious green line that seems to denote some invariable constituent
of the sun's outer atmosphere, but the element to which this green
line owes its origin is wholly unknown." The same author quotes from
Dr. Huggins as follows: "It is interesting to read what Dr. Huggins
has to tell us about the solar corona. The nature of this marvellous
appendage to the sun is still a matter of uncertainty. There can,
however, be no doubt that the corona consists of highly-attenuated
matter driven outward from the sun by some repulsive force, and it is
also clear that if this force be not electric, it must at least be
something of a very kindred character.... So far as the spectrum of
the corona is concerned, we may summarize what is known in the words
of Dr. Huggins: 'The green coronal line has no known representative
in terrestrial substances, nor has Schuster been able to recognize any
of our elements in the other lines of the corona.'" The account given
by General Myer--quoted in Professor Proctor's article, "The Sun's
Corona"--of the great eclipse of 1869, as viewed from an altitude
of five thousand five hundred feet above sea-level, is as follows:
"As a centre stood the full and intensely black disk of the moon,
surrounded by an aureola of soft bright light, through which shot out,
as if from the circumference of the moon, straight, massive silvery
rays, seeming distinct and separate from each other, to a distance
of two or three diameters of the lunar disk; the whole spectacle
showing as upon a background of diffused rose-colored light. The
silvery rays were longest and most prominent at four points of the
circumference, ... apparently equidistant from each other. There was
no motion of the rays: they seemed concentric." Three diameters would
make these rays extend two and a half million miles at least from the
sun's photosphere, or even its chromosphere. The coincidence between
these rays and those observed (see above) in the eclipse of 1893 must
be noted, since these latter were conceived at one time to be meteor
streams. As those seen in 1893 radiated from the poles, and were curved
in form, while those last noted radiated at four equidistant points,
none polar, and were straight, it will be seen that, if both phenomena
were of the same class, they could not have been due to meteor streams.

The sun's spots, which we will next refer to, are deep,
relatively dark, but in fact extremely bright depressions in the
photosphere. "Many spots are of enormous size" (see article, "Sun");
"one had a diameter exceeding fifty thousand miles, and many far larger
than this have been seen. The spots are not scattered over the whole
surface of the sun, but are for the most part confined to two belts
between latitude five degrees and thirty degrees, on either side of the
solar equator. An equatorial zone six degrees wide is almost entirely
free from spots.... The inclination of the solar equator is about
seven degrees.... The spots on the sun usually have a dark central
region called the umbra, within which is a still darker part called
the nucleus, while around this there is a fringe of fainter shade than
the umbra, called the penumbra. Although the umbra and nucleus appear
dark, however, it is not to be supposed that they are really dark;
... though the nucleus looks perfectly black by contrast with the
general surface, it shines in reality with a light unbearably brilliant
when viewed alone, while his thermal measurements show that the heat
from the nucleus is even greater proportionately than the light, and
not very greatly below the heat of the surrounding surface.... The
recognition of a nucleus within the umbra would seem to indicate that
a third cloud layer (besides the outer or photosphere and a darker
cloud layer beneath) exists within the second or internal layer of
Herschel's theory. But the observations of Professor Langley show that
most probably all the features of the solar photosphere yet observed
are phenomena of cloud envelopes, since he has been able to recognize
cloud forms at one level floating over cloud forms at a lower level,
while even in the (relatively) darkest depths of the nucleus clouds
are still to be perceived, though so deep down that their outlines
can be barely discerned." Professor Ball says of the heat-wave of
1892, "As to the activity of the sun during the past summer, a very
striking communication has recently been made by one of the most
rising American astronomers, Mr. George E. Hale, of Chicago. He has
invented an ingenious apparatus for photographing on the same plate
at one exposure both the bright spots and the protuberances of the
sun.... On the 15th of July a photograph of the sun showed a large
spot. Another photograph taken in a few minutes exhibited a bright
band; twenty-seven minutes later a further exposure displayed an
outburst of brilliant faculæ all over the spot. At the end of an
hour the faculæ had all vanished and the spot was restored to its
original condition. It was not a mere coincidence that our magnetic
observatories exhibited considerable disturbances the next day, and
that brilliant auroras were noted." Carrington's observations have
shown that spots in different solar latitudes travel at different
rates. "Taking two parts of the visible solar surface in the same
longitude, but one in latitude forty-five degrees (say), the other on
the equator, the latter will advance farther and farther in longitude
from the former, gaining daily about two degrees, so that in the
course of about one hundred and eighty days it will have gained a
complete revolution. That is to say, the sun's equator makes about two
revolutions more per annum than regions in forty-five degrees north
and south solar latitude." The sun is about 850,000 miles in diameter;
its density is one-fourth that of the earth; its mass is 316,000 times
greater, and its volume 1,253,000. Gravity at its surface is 27.1 times
that of the earth; its distance is approximately 92,000,000 miles;
it rotates upon its axis, which is inclined to the planetary plane at
an angle of seven degrees, once in twenty-five and one-third days,
apparently increased to thirty days by the earth's orbital advance
in the same direction around the sun; and it has a motion around its
center,--a true orbital motion,--due to displacement by gravity of
the planetary masses, which, however, is always within its own mass.

The above, in brief, is, so far as we know, the constitution of
the sun and its appendages. Its internal globe is surrounded by
a glowing gaseous envelope, the photosphere, which is the visible
orb, composed of cloud masses of glowing hydrogen gas intermingled
with vapors of many of our terrestrial elements, all in a state
of apparent disassociation. Of the constitution of the sun's mass,
Professor Ball says, "Professor Rowland has shown that thirty-six
terrestrial elements are certainly indicated in the solar spectrum,
while eight others are doubtful. Fifteen elements have not been
found, though sought for, and ten elements have not yet been compared
with the sun's spectrum. Reasons are also given for showing that,
though fifteen elements had no lines corresponding to those shown in
the solar spectrum, yet there is but little evidence to show that
they are really absent from the sun. Dr. Huggins epitomizes these
very interesting results in the striking remark, 'It follows that
if the whole earth were heated to the temperature of the sun, its
spectrum would resemble very closely the solar spectrum.'" Outside
the photosphere is the simpler chromosphere, composed largely of
hydrogen, and merging into the corona at a distance of hundreds of
thousands of miles from the sun's apparent surface, and this corona
extends outward to a vast distance, and is itself largely composed
of self-luminous matter, the action of gravity being counterbalanced
by the centrifugal force of orbital rotation, or more probably by
electrical repulsion. The metallic vapors in the sun's photosphere
are suspended in glowing hydrogen, which vastly preponderates over
all the others in mass and volume, the incandescence of which is
the principal source of solar light and heat. The planets revolve
in elliptical orbits around this central sun, and crossing these
orbits at various angles rush streams of cometic matter and comets
and meteoric bodies, in streams and clouds, which, swiftly sweeping
around at various distances, are again thrown off into space. Meteors
constantly fall into the sun's mass, as they do upon the earth; but the
grand key-note of all his life and energy, so far as we can perceive,
is the vast envelope of glowing hydrogen gas.

Conversely, the planetary envelopes are of relatively cool oxygen
mixed with nitrogen gas, which hold in suspension diffused aqueous
vapors. If our own aqueous vapors are derived by the attraction of
gravity from the interplanetary space, as they must have been, we can
be sure that, were the sun at a sufficiently low temperature, he, too,
would gather to himself a surrounding envelope of aqueous vapor, larger
than our own in proportion to his mass, and larger than that of all
the planets together, the combined mass of which he exceeds by seven
hundred and fifty times. We should also expect similar aggregations
of aqueous vapors to surround all the fixed stars in proportion to
their various masses, yet we do not find aqueous vapor there, but
hydrogen instead. And in the distant telescopic nebulæ we still find
hydrogen and nitrogen; even in the comets we find free hydrogen in
vast predominance, but not free oxygen; so that we may roughly divide
the bodies of stellar space into two grand categories,--those with
atmospheres of hydrogen and those with atmospheres of oxygen. It is
true that the latter are limited to the planets of our own system, so
far as direct observation goes, for we cannot see such dark planets
as exist beyond our own solar system; but if such planets exist,
as they must, for reasons stated later on, and revolve around their
own central suns, we may infer, with the strength of demonstration
almost, that if their suns correspond to our sun in this respect, their
planets will correspond to our planets in a similar respect. But the
bodies with atmospheres of oxygen are those which rotate around the
sun substantially as a center, while with reference to themselves the
sun is more or less a fixed body in space. It is true that our whole
system is drifting through space, at present in the direction of the
constellation Lyra, and directly away from that portion of space
occupied by Sirius and Canopus, with an annual motion of probably
hundreds of millions of miles. Professor Ball ("In the High Heavens")
says, "In conclusion, it would seem that the sun and the whole solar
system are bound on a voyage to that part of the sky which is marked
by the star Delta Lyræ. It also appears that the speed with which
this motion is urged is such as to bring us every day about 700,000
miles nearer to this part of the sky. In one year the solar system
accomplishes a journey of no less than 250,000,000 miles." A speed of
eight miles per second gives an annual rate of 252,288,000 miles. This
speed, however, is greatly exceeded by many stars (as determined
by displacement of the lines of the spectrum); the star No. 1830,
of Groombridge's catalogue (see "In the High Heavens"), has a rate
of two hundred miles per second. The author says, "Indeed, in some
cases stellar velocities are attained which appear to be even greater
than that just mentioned. We do not, therefore, make any extravagant
supposition in adopting a speed of twenty miles per second," which
he takes as the average. "I have adopted this particular velocity as
fairly typical of sidereal motions generally. It is rather larger than
the speed with which the earth moves in its orbit." The distances,
of course, are equally enormous. This author says, "The nearest star,
as far as we yet know, in the northern hemisphere is 61 Cygni.... I
think we cannot be far wrong in adopting a value of fifty millions
of millions of miles.... In the course of a million years a star with
the average speed of twenty miles a second would move over a distance
which was about a dozen times as great as the distance between 61
Cygni and the solar system." This assuming that the solar system is
at rest, which is not the case, as the author says, "Unless binary,
stars do not remain in proximity, so far as we know; the general rule
appears to be that of universal movement through space." This drift
through space, however, no more affects the terms of the problem than
the rotation of the earth upon its axis or its orbital motion affects
the operations of an electric machine as the handle may be rotated to
or from the direction of these motions. Both machine and reservoir
of energy occupying a fixed relation with reference to each other,
the positions of each are the same as though absolutely fixed. This
is true of gravitation, likewise, as well as of all other natural
and universal forces.

The fact established, then, that attenuated aqueous vapor is
diffused throughout the interplanetary space occupied by our own
solar system, and that it tends to surround our sun and planetary
bodies with aqueous envelopes of increased density, proportionate to
the action of gravity, the question arises, Is there any known force
which will act through such interplanetary space to decompose such
aqueous vapor into its constituent elements and deposit hydrogen gas
around the sun and oxygen gas around the planets, and which, while
maintaining a planetary temperature such as we find on the planets,
will at the same time raise the hydrogen envelope of the sun to such a
temperature of incandescence that it will become a glowing sphere of
heated hydrogen, in which other constituents of the sun's mass will
be raised to incandescence and partially volatilized in the intense
heat of that incandescent gas; in which, in fact, the phenomena of
the sun will become manifest? If so, two vastly important corollaries
are inevitable: first, that the fixed stars, which also shine with
the light of their own glowing hydrogen, are themselves surrounded by
a similar aqueous vapor, diffused through their own adjacent space,
and that, in consequence, not only our own planetary distances, but all
interstellar space, as far as the utmost distance of the faintest fixed
stars, is likewise pervaded by the same attenuated aqueous vapor, and
that this is the grand source from which is derived all solar energy,
not only of our own sun, but of all the other flaming orbs of space;
and, second, which is still more important to us as citizens of the
universe, that each flaming hydrogen sun must have surrounding it a
correlative dark planetary system of its own, and that the complement
of glowing hydrogen, as an incandescent envelope of the central
orb, necessitates the corresponding supplement of cool oxygen as
an envelope for each of such planetary bodies; in other words, that
without such planets as our system possesses, there can be no suns such
as our own and the other suns we see. Vast orbs might be conceived
of as rotating in eternal darkness without associated satellites,
but the incandescent atmosphere of hydrogen must have--not may have,
but must have--subordinate planets substantially similar to ours,
surrounded by atmospheres substantially similar to our own (for we
find free nitrogen in comets, in meteorites, and in the faintest
nebulæ), and these planets are thus fitted, so far as we can know,
for the support of organic life and for the same orderly courses
of nature as we see manifest around us. They must be cool, for at
the planetary poles there must be a moderate temperature in contrast
with the solar pole, which becomes, of necessity, highly heated; they
must have an atmosphere of oxygen in order that the solar center may
have an atmosphere of hydrogen; these planetary atmospheres must be
supplied with nitrogen, because nitrogen is universally available,
and similar causes operating under similar circumstances will produce
like effects; these atmospheres must be charged with condensed aqueous
vapors, and, if cool enough, must have deposited water in liquid form,
for aqueous vapors when condensed by gravity are the correlated sources
of supply of their respective gaseous components at both solar and
planetary poles; and these planets must rotate in orderly periods
around their central suns, or the aqueous vapors cannot be regularly
and continuously disassociated into their elemental gases. These
planets may be few or many--perhaps even a single one sometimes--for
each sun, but they must be large enough or numerous enough to operate
by their aggregate mass, so as to disassociate around the planets
as much oxygen as their central sun disassociates of hydrogen in
their combining proportions,--that is, two volumes of hydrogen for
each one of oxygen. We will therefore find in such planets all the
potentialities of life--we can see and study these planets, though
physically invisible, as easily and as thoroughly as we do our own,
for having the relationship of constitution between our own planets
and our sun, we may thereby learn the essential relationship between
any fixed star and its planets by directly studying the constitution
of such star alone. Among the planets of our own system Neptune and
Mercury, and those which exist adjacent to their boundaries, can be
studied with difficulty and uncertainty; but what astronomer doubts
that they are constituted much like the other planets, and have passed,
or will pass, through such stages of progress as we find apparent among
those more directly under our observation? While we shall thus find
universality and harmony among all the starry systems, we shall not
find identity; but with the guiding light of demonstrated scientific
principles, we may apply our knowledge as a key to unlock the mysteries
of the most distant stars. The Milky Way will gleam with new meaning,
Sirius, Aldebaran, the Pleiades, will send us messages of fellowship,
and the established sphere of creative energy will have expanded,
with all its wondrous mechanism, to fill the universe. When we see
at night a vast factory building with every window lighted, one
who understands the operation and mechanism essential to the work
of a mill sees not alone the illuminated windows, but the looms
in motion, the flying shuttles, the spindles humming, the wheels
turning, and all the complicated machinery in active operation. And
he can even picture operatives at work in their various avocations,
and the flashing windows, though themselves silent, are the visible
index of the light within which illuminates and makes possible the work
there performed. And so, when thus comprehended, the flaming stars,
but points of light in the archways of the sky, themselves will reveal
to us the wondrous workings within the realm which they illuminate
and warm and vivify. We may also reasonably infer, as will be more
fully explained further on, that there can be no actual basis for the
opinion sometimes expressed, that great, dark, solid orbs--independent
worlds, in fact--are drifting about through space at random, as it
were, like homeless vagabonds. In these sparsely-occupied domains
the head of each household, as in every well-regulated family, has
all its different members gathered around in strict subordination,
to aid in the support of the establishment. No sun no planets; no
planets no sun, is the general statement of the sidereal formula. Like
a sexual duality, the mutually correlated parts constitute a single,
composite, and interdependent whole: one generates, concentrates,
and transmits; the other receives, transforms, and delivers.


    Note.--Regarding the absence of oxygen from the sun's atmosphere
    we quote the following from Lord Salisbury's very recent address
    (see note at end of Chapter I.): "It is a great aggravation of
    the mystery which surrounds the question of the elements, that,
    among the lines which are absent from the spectrum of the sun,
    those of nitrogen and oxygen stand first. Oxygen constitutes the
    largest portion of the solid and liquid substances of our planet,
    so far as we know it; and nitrogen is very far the predominant
    constituent of our atmosphere. If the earth is a detached bit
    whirled off the mass of the sun, as cosmogonists love to tell
    us, how comes it that in leaving the sun we cleaned him out so
    completely of his nitrogen and oxygen that not a trace of these
    gases remains behind to be discovered even by the sensitive
    vision of the spectroscope?" We shall find that the absence of
    oxygen in the solar envelope is a necessary corollary of its
    presence in those of the planets. The same is true, possibly, of
    nitrogen. Ammoniacal vapors are decomposable into hydrogen and
    nitrogen, and hydrocarbon gases into hydrogen and carbon, just
    as aqueous vapors are resolvable into hydrogen and oxygen. In the
    earlier stages of the earth's development we have abundant evidence
    of an atmosphere heavily laden with carbonic vapors, which have
    disappeared, to remain stored as fixed carbon, and the oxygen
    has also largely disappeared, to constitute the enormous mass of
    oxides in the earth's mass, while the nitrogen remains to dilute
    the remaining oxygen and constitute the air we breathe. Their
    common correlative, hydrogen, intermingled with metallic vapors,
    composes the vast atmosphere of the sun.








CHAPTER III.

THE MODE OF SOLAR ENERGY.


But is there such an available force? There is one, and only
one,--electricity, when properly generated and suitably applied. It
is an axiom of electrical science that any fluid which will at all
conduct a current of electricity can be decomposed by a current of
electricity. (See Urbanitsky's work, "Electricity in the Service of
Man," Cassell's edition, page 154.) It is there stated (page 152),
"We have frequently had occasion to mention certain chemical effects
of electricity,--namely, the decomposition of gaseous compounds
into simple gases." Page 157, "Whatever the substances we expose
to the action of the galvanic current, decomposition takes place
proportional to the strength of the current." Page 152, "Hydrogen is
always evolved at the negative pole of the battery and oxygen at the
positive pole. The gases can then be collected in different tubes,
the hydrogen tube receiving twice as much gas as the oxygen tube;
since water consists of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume
of oxygen, it follows that the galvanic current decomposes water
into its constituents. As chemically pure water has so great a
resistance as almost to force us to consider it a non-conductor,
it is generally acidulated with sulphuric acid. The smallest amount
of acid diminishes the resistance considerably. The silent discharge
is far more effective in bringing about this transformation than the
spark discharge." Page 37, "Gases are bad conductors of electricity;
if it had been otherwise, we should never have become acquainted with
electricity, as it would have been conducted away by the air as fast
as it was generated. The vacuum also does not conduct electricity,
but moist air becomes a partial conductor. Moist air also will spoil
the insulation of non-conducting supports. All bodies are more or
less hygroscopic, and the moisture condensed on their surfaces thus
turns the best insulators into conductors. Change of temperature also
influences conductivity." Page 63, "When using induction machines, the
moisture of the air often causes experiments to fail, especially before
large audiences. The atmosphere becomes saturated with moisture, and
it is often impossible to get the machine in working order." Several
desiccating devices are mentioned by the authors of this work, as
used with such machines, to prevent such dissipation or conduction
of electricity from the machine into space by the aqueous vapor of
the atmosphere. In describing the aurora borealis (page 93), these
authors say, "The rarefied air is nearer the earth at the poles than
the equator, in consequence of the earth's centrifugal motion, and,
the earth being negatively electrified, negative electricity will flow
from this point, directed against the positively electrified upper
layers of rarefied air." Same work, pages 127, 128, "The resistance
(in liquids) diminishes as the temperature increases, a result which
is exactly opposite to what occurs with metals. Conductivity for
carbon increases with the temperature, thus agreeing with the action
of liquids." Page 133, "To determine the resistance in liquids,
the above methods cannot be employed, liquids being decomposed by
the electrical current." Referring to the voltaic arc and the spark
of the induction apparatus (page 200), it is said, "Dry air under
great pressure offers a high resistance, but a perfect vacuum is a
perfect insulator, and between these extremes there are degrees of
rarification which admit of a flow of electricity." In general, it
is said that electrical decomposition requires that the electrolyte
be in liquid form, but this is not universally true, and throughout
interplanetary space may not be true at all. In Ferguson's work on
Electricity, it is stated that, "The passage of electricity through
compound gases in a state of great rarity, as in the so-called vacuum
tubes, frequently separates them up into their constituents." So, also,
the opinion that electricity cannot be readily conducted through
dry gases is refuted by the play of the auroral streamers. The
distance from the surface of the earth of these electrical waves
and the auroral arch is variously estimated at from seventy to two
hundred and sixty-five miles, and in one instance "at a height of
from four thousand to six thousand miles;" see article in Appleton's
Cyclopædia. Certainly there could be no sensible moisture at the
temperatures there prevalent, and especially at night and during the
fall and winter months when these displays are very frequent. Whether
the currents be due to induction, as between neighboring bodies one of
which is electrified, or from direct emission, as in brush discharges,
there must obviously be some medium of contact and continuity for
the free transference of electrical energy through space. Regarding
the rationale of electrolysis ("Electricity in the Service of
Man"), after discussing certain other theories, the authors say,
"Clausius, too, assumes an electrified condition of the molecules
of each electrode, but he neither attributes to the galvanic current
the force of direction nor power of decomposing. He points out that
both the molecules of fluids and also their atoms are in continual
motion. The atoms in molecules of fluids are held together but by a
moderate force, and the molecules themselves constantly undergo changes
both of synthesis and analysis. The galvanic current merely effects a
regulated motion of the atoms; the positive ions are attracted by the
negative electrode, and the negative ions by the positive electrode,
and by this means are separated out from the liquid." Page 91, "The
upper layers of air are more or less electrified, so as to have a
potential differing from that of the earth, but how their electrical
condition has been produced is not at present known. Condensation of
water-vapor is supposed to produce electricity. Close to the earth
the air has little or no electricity; the farther from the earth
the greater the amount of electricity in the air." Referring to the
sparking discharge, it is said, page 75, "The density of the air,
however, has to be taken into account; the sparking distance is
lessened in denser air, and becomes greater when the atmospheric
pressure is diminished. Not only the density, but also the chemical
composition of the medium influences the sparking distance. Faraday
found the distances considerably less in chlorine gas, but twice
as long in hydrogen gas as in air." Page 74, "The sparking distance
increases at a somewhat greater rate than the difference of potential
of the discharging bodies.... When the sparking distance becomes very
great ... it is proportional to the difference of potential." Page 91,
"There is a difference of potential between the earth and points in the
air above. In fine weather the potential is higher the higher we go,
increasing usually at the rate of twenty to forty volts for each foot."

It will be seen that, continued upward at this rate, the increased
electrical pressure for each mile of elevation would be between 100,000
and 200,000 volts, or for each one hundred miles more than 10,000,000
volts; and at an altitude of one thousand miles, if carried so far,
the potential would be between one and two hundred million volts,
an electrical pressure quite inconceivable to us. Such a potential
in currents of enormous quantity continually flowing from the earth
to the sun would certainly decompose any aqueous vapors condensed
around these bodies. But the question at once arises, What reason
is there to suppose that such currents could possibly flow between
the earth and the sun, across that vast intervening region of space,
a distance of more than 90,000,000 miles? And would not the resistance
to such currents in transit be so enormous that the entire potential,
however great, would have been practically lost long before reaching
the sun? To this there is a complete and irrefutable answer, not
based upon any abstract theory, but upon established fact. It is an
absolute certainty that electrical currents of enormous quantity and
high potential are constantly passing between the earth and the sun,
and that these currents have so free a passage--far more free than
through any metallic circuits that we know of--that they pass over
this enormous distance absolutely without appreciable resistance. We
may note in this connection the well-known facts, now being largely
utilized, though the art is still in its infancy, of telegraphing and
transmitting all sorts of electrical currents over large distances
without wires or any conductors, except those furnished by nature.

Of the currents between the earth and the sun, Professor Proctor,
in his "Light Science for Leisure Hours," says, "Remembering the
influence which the sun has been found to exercise upon the magnetic
needle, the question will naturally arise, Has the sun anything to do
with magnetic storms? We have clear evidence that he has. On the 1st of
September, 1859, Messrs. Carrington and Hodgson were observing the sun,
one at Oxford and the other in London. Their scrutiny was directed to
certain large spots which at that time marked the sun's face. Suddenly
a bright light was seen by each observer to break out on the sun's
surface and to travel, slowly in appearance, but in reality at the rate
of about seven thousand miles in a minute, across a part of the solar
disk. Now, it was found afterwards that the self-registering magnetic
instruments at Kew had made at that very instant a strongly-marked
jerk. It was learned that at that moment a magnetic storm prevailed
in the West Indies, in South America, and in Australia. The signal
men in the telegraph stations at Washington and Philadelphia received
strong electric shocks; the pen of Bain's telegraph was followed by
a flame of fire; and in Norway the telegraphic machinery was set on
fire. At night great auroras were seen in both hemispheres. It is
impossible not to connect these startling magnetic indications with
the remarkable appearance observed upon the sun's disk. But there is
other evidence. Magnetic storms prevail more commonly in some years
than in others. In those years in which they occur most frequently
it is found that the ordinary oscillations of the magnetic needle
are more extensive than usual. Now, when these peculiarities had been
noticed for many years, it was found that there was an alternate and
systematic increase and diminution in intensity of magnetic action,
and that the period of the variation was about eleven years. But at
the same time a diligent observer had been recording the appearance
of the sun's face from day to day and from year to year. He had
found that the solar spots are in some years more freely displayed
than in others, and he had determined the period in which the spots
had successively presented with maximum frequency to be about eleven
years. On a comparison of the two sets of observations it was found
(and has now been placed beyond a doubt by many years of continual
observation) that magnetic perturbations are most energetic when the
sun is most spotted, and vice versa. For so remarkable a phenomenon
as this none but a cosmical cause can suffice. We can neither say
that the spots cause the magnetic storms nor that the magnetic storms
cause the spots. We must seek for a cause producing at once both sets
of phenomena." It will be observed that the phenomena seen in the sun
were marked at the same instant by violent electric perturbations on
earth. Hence something must have passed with the velocity of light,
which we know to be at the rate of 188,000 miles per second, or in
about eight minutes from the sun to the earth. But it is stated in
"Electricity in the Service of Man," page 82, that, "According to the
theoretical calculations of Kirchhoff, as well as of Ayrton and Perry,
the velocity of electricity in a wire without resistance would be
equal to the velocity of light." Hence we perceive that the apparent
difficulty has vanished in the light of observed fact, and that
currents of electricity do pass and are constantly passing between
the earth and the sun without the slightest loss of speed,--that
is to say, without resistance. We shall find in the sequel that the
above phenomena were caused most probably by a partial interruption
of a constant direct current from the earth to the sun, instead of
by an opposite return current from the sun to the earth. In further
illustration of the above facts we quote the following, page 172,
"Electricity in the Service of Man:" "Many attempts have been made
to find a connection between the spots and prominences in the sun and
the electrical phenomena on the earth. Professor Forster says that by
numerous magnetic observations of the last thirty or forty years it
has been proved that the formation of black spots on the surface of
the sun, and the generation of pillars and clouds of glowing gases
in the immediate neighborhood of the sun, stand in close connection
with certain deviations in direction and intensity of the earth's
magnetic forces." Professor Proctor, in his "Light Science for Leisure
Hours," says, "From all this it appears, incontestably, that there
is an intimate connection between the causes of auroras and those
of terrestrial magnetism.... The magnetic needle not only swayed
responsively to auroras observable in the immediate neighborhood,
but to auroras in progress hundreds and thousands of miles away. Nay,
as inquiry progressed, it was discovered that the needles in our
northern observatories are swayed by influences associated even with
the occurrence of auroras around the southern polar regions.... Could
we only associate auroras with terrestrial magnetism, we should
still have done much to enhance the interest which the beautiful
phenomenon is calculated to excite. But when once this association
has been established, others of even greater interest are brought
into recognition; for terrestrial magnetism has been clearly shown
to be influenced directly by the action of the sun.... We already
begin to see, then, that auroras are associated in some mysterious
way with the action of the solar rays. The phenomenon which had been
looked on for so many ages as a mere spectacle, caused perhaps by some
process in the upper regions of the air of a simple local character,
has been brought into the range of planetary phenomena. As surely as
the brilliant planets which deck the nocturnal skies are illuminated
by the same orb which gives us our days and seasons, so are they
subject to the same mysterious influence which causes the northern
banners to wave respondently over the starlit depths of heaven. Nay,
it is even probable that every flicker and coruscation of our auroral
displays correspond with similar manifestations upon every planet
which travels round the sun." In Professor Ball's late work, "In the
High Heavens," the author says, "Dr. Schuster suggests that there may
be an electric connection between the sun and the planets. In fact,
with some limitations, we might even assert that there must be such a
connection. It is well known that great outbreaks on the sun have been
immediately followed, I might almost say accompanied, by remarkable
magnetic disturbances on the earth. The instances that are recorded
of this connection are altogether too remarkable to be set aside as
mere coincidences. Dr. Huggins has not referred in this connection
to Hertz's astonishing discoveries; but it seems quite possible that
research along this line may throw light on the subject, at present so
obscure, of the electric relation between the sun and the earth." Of
this common electrical relationship between our sun and the different
planets, and of these with each other, Professor Proctor says, in
his article, "Terrestrial Magnetism," "Interesting as are the bonds
of union which Copernicus and Kepler and Newton have traced in the
relations of our system, it would seem as though we were approaching
the traces of a yet more wonderful law of association. We see the
earth's magnetism responding to the solar influences, not merely
in those rhythmic motions which belong to the periodic variations,
but in sudden thrills affecting the whole framework of our globe. The
magnetic storms which are called into action by such solar disturbances
as the one of September, 1859, are, we may feel sure, not peculiar
to our own earth. The other planets feel the same influence,--not,
perhaps, in exactly the same way, but according to the constitution
and physical habitudes which respectively belong to them. So that one
can scarce conceive a subject of study at once more promising and more
interesting." Of these prophetic shadows which science often seems to
cast before, Professor Nichol, in his "Architecture of the Heavens"
(referring to Sir William Herschel), says, "Without difficulty or
pretence he there casts aside an idea which had not been questioned
before, unless in a few of those obscure, indefinite speculations
which, strangely enough, often prelude important discoveries." These
facts are thus incontestably established: that electric currents of
enormous energy and vast quantity are constantly passing without
appreciable resistance and with the speed of light between the
earth and the sun; that such currents cannot be conducted through
vacua, or through dry gases, or through a dense medium; and that,
whatever other matter may exist in the intervening space, such space
is pervaded throughout by an attenuated vapor of such constitution
and density that it will transmit such electrical currents with the
highest conceivable efficiency. We know that such passage of these
currents cannot depend upon the ether of space which is acted upon by
the sun to produce the ethereal undulatory vibrations of light and
heat, for, after we have produced the most perfect vacuum possible,
we find that the rays of light continue to pass through it as freely
as they pass through space, while currents of electricity cannot be
made to pass at all. Hence we know to a certainty that the medium
which transmits these enormous currents of electricity must be a vapor
capable of conducting electricity, that it must hence be decomposable
by the electric current, and that when decomposed one of its elements
must consist of hydrogen gas and the other of oxygen; in other words,
that this conducting medium must consist of attenuated aqueous vapor,
commingled doubtless with other vapors which themselves, like the acid
of the acidulated water used in electrolysis, aid in the conduction
of these enormous currents. We also know that such vapors in space
will be necessarily attracted, by gravitation, around the solar and
planetary bodies immersed therein, and must form condensed vaporous
atmospheres or cloud masses, and if these are decomposed by the passage
of such currents of electricity, that hydrogen gas will be liberated
at the solar galvanic pole and oxygen at the terrestrial or other
planetary pole, precisely as we find to be the case in nature. Will
such gaseous envelopes, then, have the same temperature for each
gas when thus liberated, or will the hydrogen envelope of the sun be
heated to incandescence, due to the passage of the electrical current?

The temperature of interplanetary space is probably very low. Of this
Professor Ball says, "What this may be is a matter of some uncertainty,
but from all the evidence available it seems plain that we may put it
at not less than three hundred degrees below zero;" and the same author
adds, "The temperature is taken to be sixty-four degrees below zero,
being presumably that at the confines of the atmosphere." Whatever
the temperature of space, or its variations, may be, the passage of
the planetary electricity through the condensed hydrogen envelope of
the sun will produce great changes in the heat of that body and of
the solar core within. While with a small electrolytic apparatus we
find no special differences of temperature in the gases, with large
quantities of electricity, driven at a high potential, we find that
a new and startling result ensues. Something of this sort is seen
in the operation of electric arc-light lamps, now in common use,
in which two slightly separated carbon points are traversed by a
current of considerable potential. The current is driven across the
intervening space between the points, carrying with it an atmosphere
of disintegrated carbon, through which the electricity is carried
at its highest speed, and a most brilliant light is produced. In
"Electricity in the Service of Man," page 151, it is said, "We may
conclude from this that the current does not cease when the arc
of light is formed. The resistance of the arc seems to be only very
slight; in fact, the current must be conducted by it." Of the structure
and constitution of the luminous electrosphere, or arc, produced in
these lamps, "Professor J. A. Fleming," says the Scientific American,
"has shown that the well-known color of the light of the electric
arc from carbon points is due to the incandescence of the carbon
filling the space between the positive and the negative rods. The true
arc is here, and exists in a space filled with the vapor of carbon,
which has a brilliant violet color. Examined by the spectroscope, the
central axis of the carbon arc gives a spectrum marked by two bright
violet bands. Outside this is an aureole of carbon vapor of yellow or
golden color. The electrical strain of the arc occurs chiefly at the
surface of the crater which forms at the end of the positive rod,
where, in fact, the principal work of generating light is done;
for eighty per cent. of the total light of the arc comes from the
incandescent carbon at this place. Thus, in a sense, the arc light is
mainly an incandescent light, the effect being produced by the layer of
carbon which is being constantly evaporated at an extremely elevated
temperature. Hence the light of the carbon arc is not, and can never
be, white, as it is sometimes described as being, but must always be
tinted violet by the carbon vapor normally present between the rods."

The significance of the above-quoted extract will be readily perceived
when we come to consider the action of the direct planetary electrical
currents upon the solar envelope, the effects in both cases being
substantially identical. The quantity and intensity of the electric
current, as it passes through the incandescent arc to the negative
pole, and thence back to the dynamo, are diminished exactly in
proportion to the energy expended in the generation of the light
and heat of the arc. It is precisely the same as in the operation
of a turbine water-wheel; if working at its highest efficiency, the
discharged water is almost deprived of force: its gravity has been
converted into work. In the electric light this conversion is only
partial, owing to atmospheric and other conditions; but in the case
of the solar envelope and its core, it is nearly, if not altogether,
perfect, so that the currents of electricity are almost entirely
converted into light and heat, or expended in the electrolytic
decomposition of the surrounding aqueous vapors, and do not reappear
as electricity, but as converted solar energy. Brilliant, however,
as the light rays are in a powerful arc lamp,--perhaps the nearest
to solar light we can produce,--the obscure heat rays are far more
numerous and powerful. On page 476 of the work just cited a table is
given, showing the proportion of visible and invisible rays emitted
by different illuminants, and with the electric lamp, even, ninety per
cent. of all the rays emitted by the voltaic arc are heat rays, which
are obscure and invisible. But the startling effects of electricity
of large quantity and high potential, in the decomposition of water,
are far more strikingly exhibited by an apparatus shown in 1893 at the
Chicago Exhibition by a firm from Brussels, and which is described
in the Electrical Review as follows: "An ordinary wooden pail is
three-quarters filled with water slightly acidulated; a lead plate
about nine inches broad by sixteen inches long dips to the bottom of
the pail and is connected to an incandescent dynamo machine capable of
giving over one hundred and fifty ampères. The iron rod, or article to
be heated, is connected to the pole of the dynamo and simply dipped
into the water; it immediately becomes heated and rapidly rises to a
melting temperature; only that portion of the metal completely immersed
becomes heated, and the heating is so rapid that neither the water nor
that portion of the metal out of the water becomes very warm. Wrought
iron and steel actually melt if long enough held under water. A carbon
rod subjected to this process becomes amorphous carbon, proving that
a temperature of at least four thousand degrees Centigrade has been
reached, and it is stated that with two hundred and twenty volts'
pressure a temperature of eight thousand degrees Centigrade has been
reached. There are various theories to account for this phenomenon,
but from close observation it appears to be a case of arc heating. The
moment the metal is plunged into the water it is enveloped in hydrogen
gas decomposed from the water. This envelope of gas parts the water and
metal, forming an arc, which raises the surrounding gaseous envelope
to an enormous temperature; the metal surrounded by this arc is almost
immediately raised to the same temperature. A flame of burning hydrogen
appears around the metal on the surface of the water. The principle of
the method is the same as that on which the burning of an arc light
between two carbon points under water depends. An arc lamp will burn
quite steadily under water if the connections are made water-proof;
the arc itself requires no protection."

It will be seen that the process above described is precisely
analogous to that involved in the problem of the sun's energy. The
planets correspond with the leaden plates, upon which oxygen is
disengaged from the water, while at the same moment the liberated
hydrogen necessarily appears at the opposite pole. The generation
of hydrogen gas forms an envelope or atmosphere of hydrogen around
the sun which forces back the aqueous vapor. The current, in passing
through this gaseous envelope to the metal core within, intensely
heats the hydrogen, which rapidly communicates its rising heat to the
central core. If this core is composed of metals, and the temperature
be raised sufficiently high, which only depends upon the quantity and
working pressure of the electricity employed, the metal core will be
volatilized in whole or in part, and, if of mixed metals, we will
find the presence of these elements revealed in the spectroscopic
lines corresponding thereto, and the flames and flashes of hydrogen
at the surfaces beyond the envelope, at the surface of contact with
the matter of space, will be also seen. In fact, such an experiment,
properly prepared, could be made to show roughly most of the phenomena
of solar light and heat as they actually appear, such as sun-spots,
prominences, jets, plumes, faculæ, the photosphere, chromosphere,
absorption bands, vortical disturbances, metallic vapors, and the
complete solar spectrum, with the different Fraunhofer lines. In
the case of the sun, these currents must be measured by millions of
ampères, and possibly by hundreds of millions of volts, instead of by
mere hundreds, while the hydrogen envelope extends outward from the
sun's surface hundreds of thousands of miles until, perhaps, finally
merged into the corona. As the currents pass from the planets and
planetoids (for not only the larger planets, but all the planetary
bodies of our system must contribute, if any of them contribute) to
the sun, or rather to the sphere of its electrical action, without
resistance, so long as these planets generate constant currents of the
same, or nearly the same, potential, so long will the sun maintain
his constant light and heat; if these are increased or diminished,
the sun's light and heat will be temporarily, but only temporarily,
increased or diminished; and this process must continue, without
further loss or change, indefinitely into the future. Whatever the
sun may gain by increment of meteoric masses may pass for what it
is worth, but the gradual contraction of his volume cannot proceed
while his present temperature is maintained by the passage of such
currents,--that is to say, his light and heat will remain constant,
and also his mass and volume, so long as the electric currents which
pass from the planets to the sun and the constitution of space which
surrounds the sun and planets themselves remain constant.

It now remains to consider how such enormous currents of electricity
can be generated and maintained. We know, of course, that chemical
changes cannot operate to produce them. They must be derived from
something contained in or diffused through interplanetary space,
and the planets themselves must be the means by which such currents
of electricity are brought into effective operation. On our own
earth we have many kinds of mechanically-constructed electrical
apparatus which generate electricity, to use a popular expression,
or which, more properly, separate the opposite potentials from
an unstable electrical tension or equilibrium of the matter of
space. These machines practically take positive electricity from
the mutually-balanced electric potentials of which the earth and
its surrounding gaseous envelope are the vast common storehouse,
in such manner that the positive electricity thus drawn out from and
again passing into the common storehouse shall, during such transit,
be compelled to pass through channels which will cause it to do work,
at the expense of its potential or pressure, during its passage,
or in which electricity is raised in its electro-motive force from
a lower to a higher potential or pressure, just as the pressure of
water is increased when delivered from a greater or a still greater
height, or steam, when confined in space under higher and still higher
temperatures. But none of these machines actually generate electricity
ab initio; they merely put into effective operation the pre-existing
force. The mass of the earth is of irregularly negative polarity, the
air above is positive, and as we ascend, the potential, or voltage,
or pressure increases at a nearly uniform rate of from twenty to forty
volts for each foot. The earth is thus surrounded by an electrosphere
as well as an atmosphere, and the two are not coincident, for while
the pressure of the atmosphere diminishes as we ascend, that of the
electrosphere increases. The moon, too, and each planet must have
its electrosphere, and around the sun's core we can see the solar
electrosphere in its visible glory. Thus, all our planets rotate upon
their axes and revolve around the sun, each surrounded by an enormous
electrosphere, just as an electrical induction machine is surrounded,
when in operation, with an electrosphere of its own, and which,
by breaking connection with the conductor which carries away its
current, becomes, when shown in a darkened room, clearly visible. In
"Electricity in the Service of Man" it is said, page 63, "The inductive
action of the machine is quite as rapid and as powerful when both
collectors are removed and nothing is left but the two rotating
disks and their respective contact or neutralizing brushes. The whole
apparatus then bristles with electricity, and if viewed in the dark
presents a most beautiful appearance, being literally bathed with
luminous brush discharges." This is a true aurora.

Let us now examine some of these more recent electric machines,--the
later induction, not the older frictional machines, for it is
obvious that the rotation of the planets, if they operate as
electric generators, or separators, must act by induction and not by
friction. The frictional machines are of the old type and are well
known from the books; in these a glass disk or cylinder is rubbed
upon in its rotation by an amalgamated (so called) friction pad fixed
securely to the bed of the machine. But more recently these have
been replaced by far more powerful and simple machines which operate
entirely by induction, like approaching thunderclouds, for instance,
and in which one or more glass disks are merely rotated rapidly and
freely in the air, these disks having a number of light metallic
sectors, such as bits of tin-foil, pasted on their outer sides at
equal radial intervals, and with metallic collecting brushes which,
however, barely graze the surfaces of the rotating disk. There is
no pressure and no friction, except that of the disks as they freely
revolve in the atmosphere.

In the above-quoted work, page 61, is a description of Wimshurst's
influence machine, one of the most recent and most powerful, which we
condense as follows: This machine was produced about 1883. It consists
of two circular disks of thin glass fourteen and one-half inches in
diameter in the sample described, attached at their centers to loose
bosses, so as to be rotated by cords and pulleys operated by a handle,
in opposite directions. The disks rotate parallel with each other and
are not more than one-eighth of an inch apart, and have their surfaces
well varnished; and attached by cement to their outer surfaces are
twelve or more radial, sector-shaped plates of thin brass- or tin-foil,
disposed around the disks at equal distances apart. These sectors
take the place of the "inductors" of Holtz's instrument, and appear
to act also as carriers, though the exact nature of their action is
somewhat mysterious. It appears, however, probable that those acting
for the time as carriers on the one disk act at the same time as
inductors on the other. The two sectors on the same diameter of each
disk, at opposite sides of the center, are twice in each revolution
momentarily placed in metallic connection with one another by means of
a pair of fine wire brushes attached to the ends of a bent metal rod
loosely pivoted at the center of each disk, the metal sectors just
grazing the tips of the wire brushes as they pass. There is one of
these bent rods on the outside of each disk, and their position as
pivoted on their center can be varied at will, both with reference
to the one on the opposite side and to the position of the fixed
collecting combs. The efficiency of the machine varies with their
position, and the maximum appears to be generally when the brushes
touch the disks on diameters crossing the position of the collecting
combs at about forty-five degrees, and with the bent rods on opposite
sides at right angles to each other. The collecting combs are simple
forks with collecting points turned inward, which forks embrace the
opposite sides of the disks outside, which freely rotate between them,
and they are supported on insulated posts. These supports may be small
Leyden jars or condensers, with discharging knobs, or may be connected
with similar condensers at a distance, or arranged in batteries or
otherwise. The presence of the collecting combs is not necessary to
the operation of the machine, their sole function being to carry away
the positive electricity as generated. The machine is self-exciting,
and it is believed that the initial action must be due to friction in
the layer of air contained between the plates, which, as above stated,
are only about one-eighth of an inch apart. It is nearly independent
of atmospheric conditions, and not liable to reverse its polarity,
as are the Voss machines. The Voss machine uses a larger glass disk
which does not rotate, but is fixed, and which has a central opening
three inches wide, with a different arrangement of tin-foil disks or
sectors, and a smaller glass disk rotates parallel with it. The Holtz
machine is somewhat similar, using a single rotating, well-varnished
glass disk revolving opposite a well-varnished larger disk, the latter
provided with three sector-shaped openings or windows, with varnished
paper inductors or flaps passing through these windows so as to touch
the revolving disk. There are also two series of fine metal points held
by brass bars provided with insulated handles and discharging knobs.

It is only necessary to give a general idea of the construction and
operation of such machines, as their specific construction can be
readily learned from the books. Of the mode of operation, however,
it is said, "What takes place when the machine is in action is of
a very complicated nature, and can hardly be said to be perfectly
understood." With a Wimshurst machine having disks of a diameter
of fourteen and one-half inches "there is produced under ordinary
atmospheric conditions a powerful spark discharge between the knobs
when they are separated by a distance of four and one-half inches,
a pint size Leyden jar being in connection with each knob (one on each
opposite diameter of the two disks), and these four-and-one-half-inch
discharges take place in regular succession at every two and a half
turns of the handle. It is usual to construct the machine with small
Leyden jars or condensers attached to conductors, by which the spark
is materially increased. A machine has been constructed with plates
seven feet in diameter, which, it was believed, would give sparks
thirty inches long; but no Leyden jars have been found to withstand
its discharge, all being pierced by the enormous tension." Three
of Toepler's induction machines (see page 59, "Electricity in the
Service of Man"), connected together, gave a current which maintained
a platinum wire one-fifth of a millimeter thick continually at a red
heat, and was also capable of decomposing water.








CHAPTER IV.

THE SOURCE OF SOLAR ENERGY.


The remarkable resemblance between the mode of operation and effects of
these electrical induction machines and the vast rotating electrosphere
of the earth must be at once apparent. The operation is precisely
the same, and the results must, pari passu, be substantially
similar. We need not seek for precise parallelism of structure,
because these machines themselves, it has been shown, widely differ
in structure among themselves. But the almost infinitely more vast
terrestrial electrosphere, which cannot be less than ten thousand
miles in diameter, and perhaps much more (if we may form an opinion
from the relative magnitude of the field of action of the hydrogen
envelope which constitutes the solar electrosphere), rotating in the
attenuated vapors of space, among which vapors that of water plays a
most important part, and which vapors constantly impinge with various
disturbances of contact against the more and more attenuated layers of
the terrestrial atmosphere, and which gradually, from within outward,
less and less partakes of the earth's rotation until, finally, its
rotatory movement is lost in the vast ocean of space, establishes
the certainty that enormous quantities of electricity must there be
disengaged, precisely as in the machines which we have described,
and to learn the potential or active pressure of this electricity
we have only to consider the fact that we find a rise so rapid,
as we ascend through our atmosphere, that the potential increases
by from twenty to forty volts for each foot. That these currents
are transmitted to the sun without appreciable resistance we already
know, and that they are there transformed into light and heat we can,
from the previously cited experiments, see.

But it may be urged that the resistance of such attenuated vapors in
space, and the generation of electricity in such quantities, would
inevitably retard and finally destroy planetary motion. The sufficient
answer to this is found in the consideration that the same facts must
exist under any possible mode of organization of our solar system,
and that such interference, besides, must have absolutely prevented
its formation at all, if such were the case. All the matter of our
planetary system together is only one seven-hundred-and-fiftieth
that of the sun; if this were added to the sun's bulk it would but
slightly enlarge it. But all this solar and planetary matter together,
if distributed over the space occupied by our planetary system,--and,
by the nebular hypothesis of the organization of our solar system,
this is requisite,--and having an axial diameter one-half that
of its equatorial (see Proctor's "Familiar Essays on Scientific
Subjects,"--"Oxygen in the Sun"), would have had a density of only
about one four-hundred-thousandth that of hydrogen gas at atmospheric
pressure. This nebular mass must have had a diameter at least sixty
times that of the distance of the earth from the sun and a depth
of thirty times its distance. That this enormous mass of attenuated
matter should ever have been made to rotate as a whole by any force of
attraction, repulsion, or rotation, with a tenuity so great that, if
measured by an equal volume of hydrogen gas,--the lightest substance
known to us,--it would have furnished material for four hundred
thousand such systems as ours, presupposes a resistance so slight
that the planets themselves, when coagulated out of such a mass,
could never in any conceivable time exhibit retardation from such
a source; and we know to a certainty that such attenuated vapors do
exist in space, for electricity cannot be transmitted through a vacuum,
and it is transmitted with perfect freedom between the earth and the
sun. But it may be said that the laws were then different. If they
were different then, they are doubtless different now. If, on the
other hand, we assume that the bodies of which our solar system is
composed were simply aggregated into concrete masses from meteoric
dust, the difficulty is not lessened; for if the resistances to their
operation now are such as to perceptibly retard their motions, they
must have operated still more powerfully to originally prevent them;
while, if hurled forth by an almighty fiat, complete from the hand
of creative energy, the same force which impelled them forward must
have also established the laws under which they now move.

It is calculated that our earth must be losing time, by tidal
retardation, at the rate of one-half the moon's diameter in each twelve
hundred years (see Proctor, "Light Science for Leisure Hours,"--"Our
Chief Timepiece Losing Time"), and that "the length of a day is now
more by about one eighty-fourth part of a second than it was two
thousand years ago." Perhaps, however, we may discover that these
changes are themselves periodic and increase in cycles to a maximum,
and then diminish, as is the case with magnetic, planetary, and stellar
variations, and other similar changes, when sufficiently long observed;
for while such changes may very well accompany a theory under which
our system and all other systems are slowly running down to decay and
death, it is entirely incompatible with the primal forces under which
they must have been originally formed. In other words, if the tides
are dragging back our earth without compensation, this dragging back
can only come from the oceanic deposit of water on the earth from
the aqueous vapors of space which do not partake of the planetary
rotation and orbital movement of the earth. But if these can now
retard the earth's motion, they must have originally prevented it in
the beginning. This loss of time is, moreover, merely inferential from
mathematical computations, and its basis is found in the belief that
all the operations of nature are in a slow process of degradation,
and the calculated loss itself may be merely theoretical, and not true
in fact. Professor Proctor himself concedes the uncertainty of this
alleged retardation when he says in the same article, "At this rate
of change our day would merge into a lunar month in the course of
thirty-six thousand millions of years. But after a while the change
will take place more slowly, and some trillion or so of years will
elapse before the full change is effected."

While the processes of nature are generally believed to be running
down, everything is bent to that belief; but the forces of nature
must, nevertheless, be uniform and supreme, for it is by these forces
that the expected results are to be achieved. That changes occur
constantly is inevitable, but the source of these must be looked for
in the interaction of original forces, and not in the degradation
of systems. There is reason to believe, in fact, that the repulsion
of the terrestrial electrosphere by that of the moon may itself
be sufficient to counteract such retarding force of lunar gravity,
for the tides upon earth are not merely oceanic, but atmospheric,
and on the latter the electrical repulsion of the moon must act very
powerfully and with directly counteractive effect.

Let us now apply the preceding principles to the problem under
review. All planetary space is pervaded with attenuated vapors or
gases, among which aqueous vapor occupies a leading place. The planets
and all planetary bodies, having opposite electrical polarity from
the central and relatively fixed sun, by their orbital motions around
and constant subjection thereto act as enormous induction machines,
which generate electricity from the ocean of attenuated aqueous vapor,
each planet being surrounded by an enormous electrosphere, carried
with the planet in its axial and orbital movements, the successive
atmospheric envelopes gradually diminishing in rotational velocity
until merged into the outer ocean of space. As the planets advance in
their orbits they plunge into new and fresh fields, and, as the whole
solar system gradually moves onward through space, these fields are
never re-occupied. These electrospheres, by their rotation, generate
enormous quantities of electricity at an extremely high potential,--so
high that we can scarcely even conceive it,--and this electricity flows
in a constant current to the sun, where it disappears as electricity,
to reappear in the form of solar light and heat. These planetary
currents also flow towards such other negatively electrified bodies
as may exist in space--the comets and fixed stars, for example--in
proportion to their distance; for, since resistance is not appreciable
between ourselves and the sun, as is also the case with light, so, like
light, our electricity must pass outward as well as inward to take part
in the harmonious operations of the whole universe. But it should be
noted that the distribution of electric energy in the form of currents
is quite different from that of light or other radiant energy; for
while light is diffused from a center outward through space, electric
currents, on the contrary, are concentrated and directed along lines
of force to concrete centers of opposite polarity. As a consequence,
the intensity of light decreases according to the squares of the
distances traversed plus the resistance to the passage of the light
itself, while the electric current is only diminished by the resistance
of the medium through which it passes. As the light of the sun has a
velocity of one hundred and eighty-eight thousand miles per second,
and the electric current between the earth and the sun the same,
it will be seen that the resistance is practically alike for these
two forms of energy. Indeed, the striking resemblance between the
ethereal vibrations which constitute light and heat and exceedingly
rapid alternating currents of electricity through molecular media may
suggest that the transformation of one force into the other is some
sort of a "step-up" or "step-down" process, much higher in degree,
but of the same character as the well-known analogous electrical
transformations used in the arts. It should also be borne in mind
that, while the intensity of light diminishes according to the above
law, the quantity remains the same, less resistance, as the area
covered increases precisely in the same proportion as the intensity
diminishes,--that is, in the ratio of squares.

Around the earth and other planets gravity attracts the aqueous vapors
in increased density, the same as around the sun; but the electric
currents passing between the planets and the sun decompose this aqueous
vapor into its constituent gases, hydrogen and oxygen. The oxygen is
deposited within the positive electrospheres of the planetary bodies,
where it mingles with nitrogen to form our atmosphere and those of
the other planets. In this float the aqueous vapors condensed from
space, which are lighter than air. (See Tyndall, "The Forms of Water:"
"It also sends up a quantity of aqueous vapor which, being far lighter
than air, helps the latter to rise.") These aqueous vapors, condensed
into clouds and precipitated upon the earth, form our oceans and their
affluents. The hydrogen gas disengaged upon the sun's surface forms
a similar envelope, which is penetrated by the planetary electric
currents, and is thus highly heated and rendered incandescent; the
glowing hydrogen transmits its heat to the sun's mass within, which
is thus raised to, and permanently maintained in, a liquid or densely
gaseous state, its metallic constituents being volatilized in part,
and these metallic vapors mingle with the lower strata of hydrogen
to form the sun's photosphere, while, above, the glowing hydrogen
grows more pure, and finally, at a distance of hundreds of thousands
of miles, is merged into the corona, which is composed, in part at
least, of cosmical dust rotating around and repelled by the sun,
and which shines partly by reflected light, partly by that of the
relatively cooler hydrogen, and partly, perhaps, by electrification
of its constituents by the powerful currents passing through it. Each
of the planetary bodies, large or small, takes its proportionate part
in the generation and transmission of electricity, according to its
volume, mass, and motion. As an adjunct to this electrical sequence
we have learned that any interruption of such currents between the
generator and the receiver will cause the generating apparatus to glow
with diffused electrical light, as is the case with the Wimshurst
machine already described. When such connection is removed, it is
said, "the whole apparatus bristles with electricity, and if viewed
in the dark presents a most beautiful appearance, being literally
bathed with luminous brush discharges." Such a phenomenon recalls at
once the aurora borealis; and when we find this as a sequence of the
electrical storm of the first of September, 1859, before described
("at night great auroras were seen in both hemispheres"), and connect
with this the persistence of electricity upon insulated surfaces (see
"Electricity in the Service of Man," page 53: "Glass being a bad
conductor, the electricity does not spread all over the plate, but
remains where it is produced"), we shall inevitably conclude that there
was some partial interruption in the current flowing from the earth
to the sun at that moment; and if we recall that at that very instant
"suddenly a bright light was seen by each observer to break out on the
sun's surface and to travel across a part of the solar disk," we shall
learn that the processes connected with the production of such a bright
light will interrupt in part the terrestrial current. We can readily
understand that if this bright light exceeded in electrical intensity
that due to the earth's current, it might temporarily reverse the
polarity of the afferent current or retard its flow, like the so-called
"backwater" of a mill. It would be like attempting to discharge steam
at sixty pounds' pressure into a vessel filled with other steam at
sixty-one pounds. Whence, then, came this bright light? Perhaps from
the conjoint action of some other planet, perhaps from sudden chemical
disassociation beneath the surface, perhaps by the abnormal piling up
of depths of transparent glowing hydrogen or other local disturbance.

And this leads to the consideration of the uniformity of solar
action. The planetary electrospheres will be constant in their
operation if the constitution of surrounding space remains uniform;
but we shall find reason to believe that there are currents in
the ocean of space, as there are currents in our own seas, and
electrical generation will necessarily vary when such currents are
encountered. The sun itself in such case, however, will become an
automatic regulator, for his density being but one-fourth that of the
earth, and the spectroscope having shown his chemical composition
to a large extent, we know that his mass must be either liquid or
vaporous, and perhaps in part both. Such masses readily respond to
variations of temperature, expanding as it rises and contracting as
it falls. Hence, if a portion of space were reached where the action
of the planetary electrospheres was increased by relative increase of
temperature in some interstellar "Gulf Stream," the sun's volume would
expand and compensation be at once established, while, conversely,
with diminution of such planetary action, the solar volume would
contract and an increased supply from his reserve store be given out
thereby. In this way the condensation relied upon to give us heat for
seven or seventeen million years becomes a compensating mechanism,
self-operative through the most distant cycles of time. We shall
also find in such electric currents an explanation of sun-spots. It
is not meant that a full knowledge can be obtained of their minute
constitution, nor is it necessary; but the equatorial belt of six
degrees, nearly free from sun-spots, we can readily understand to be
caused--since sun-spots are depressions in the photosphere down to
the deeper and denser cloud strata beneath--by the equatorial piling
up of the sun's atmosphere by its rotation. Any point on the sun's
equator travels at four times the rotational velocity of one on the
earth's equator, but the sun's attraction of gravity is twenty-seven
and one-tenth times that of the earth, so that the piling up of an
atmosphere of hydrogen would be considerable, and such depressions
would not ordinarily exist there. Similarly, near the sun's poles we
should find a gradual darkening, as is the case; but from five degrees
to thirty degrees latitude, the sun, in its rotation, by reason of
the inclination of its axis, passes at every point directly beneath
the planets, or within their area of control, and here we find the
solar spots in their greatest number, size, and intensity. These
sun-spots cross the face of the sun in about fifteen days, and vary
in development from year to year, having a cycle of 11.11 years from
maximum to maximum. They also have a long cycle of about fifty-six
years. (See article "The Sun," in Appleton's Cyclopædia.) "Wolf, in
1859, presented a formula by which the frequency of spots is connected
with the motions of the four bodies, Venus, the earth, Jupiter, and
Saturn. Professor Loomis, of Yale College, has since advocated a theory
(suggested by the present writer [Proctor] in 1865, in 'Saturn and
his System,' page 168, note) that the long cycle of fifty-six years
is related to the successive conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter. But
the association is as yet very far from being demonstrated, to say the
least." Should such fact be established, an explanation for it will
be found in the direct impact of the condensed electric currents from
several planets approaching conjunction, and raising a portion of the
sun's atmosphere suddenly to a higher temperature and volatilizing an
abnormal proportion of the semi-vaporous metallic core beneath. This
would form an upburst piling the intensely heated faculæ up on the
sides and revealing the relatively darker masses of cloud beneath, the
cooler supernatant hydrogen pouring in from the upper layers to fill
the returning void. This is precisely what is seen in such spots and
their surrounding disturbances. In the article "The Sun," above quoted,
we read, "Mr. Huggins has found that several of the absorption bands
belonging to the solar spectrum are wider in the spectrum of a spot,
a circumstance indicative of increased absorption so far as the vapors
corresponding to such lines are concerned.... Near the great spots or
groups of spots there are often seen streaks more luminous than the
neighboring surface, called faculæ. They are oftenest seen towards the
borders of the disk." This writer also describes "luminous bridges
across spots which sink into the vortex and are replaced by others
of the numberless cloud-like forms from one hundred to one thousand
miles in diameter, the brilliancy of which so greatly exceeds that of
the intervening spaces that they must be recognized as the principal
radiators of the solar light and heat." The apparent retardation of
the spots most distant from the sun's equator may also be partially,
at least, explained by planetary currents of electricity, as the
equatorial atmosphere is deeper and more likely to carry forward
such vortices when formed, while the planets act more directly on
the sun's mass beneath their direct influence.

Let us consider this retardation of sun-spots somewhat more in
detail. Take, for example, the case of a large planet at such orbital
position that its direct line of electrical impact will penetrate
the photosphere at (say) seven degrees north solar latitude, which
is about fifty-two thousand miles from his equator. During its annual
revolution this planet will traverse, with its line of energy, every
point of the sun's surface down to seven degrees south latitude and
back again to its initial point, thus tracing a close spiral around
the sun for fourteen degrees, or about one hundred and four thousand
miles in width. The centrifugal force of the solar rotation piles
up the photosphere and the chromosphere around the sun's equator,
precisely as our atmosphere is piled up around our own equator. If
the planet be a large one (for distance has but little to do with
these electrical currents at planetary distances, in which they
differ entirely from light, heat, and gravity), or if there be two
planets nearly in conjunction, the body of the chromosphere and
the surface of the photosphere will gradually become highly heated,
for currents of electricity, of themselves, do not directly heat the
solar core any more than a like current heats the under carbon of an
arc lamp, the high temperature in both cases being altogether due
to the incandescent heat of the interposed arc or envelope. Faculæ
of intense brightness will then appear upon the photosphere, and
these will be driven forward and also outward in the direction of
the higher latitudes, producing an oblique forward movement from
difference of rotational speed at different portions of the sun's
surface. Similar phenomena are constantly observed on the surface
of the earth in the generation and behavior of cyclones and other
atmospheric disturbances. They may be compared to the wake of a vessel
anchored in a strong tide-way. These faculæ will slowly raise the
temperature of the surface of the sun's core beneath to the point
of eruptive volatilization, and particularly so if the planet is
receding from, instead of advancing towards, the solar equator. At
some point in advance of the line of planetary energy an eruption of
volatilized metals will suddenly occur, first thrusting up a vast
area of the photosphere and then bursting it asunder, which will
drive these ruptured masses with enormous speed forward and obliquely
outward from the equator. Such faculæ (see Proctor's "Light Science")
sometimes reach a velocity of seven thousand miles per minute, while
the sun's rotational movement at the equator is less than seventy
miles per minute. This sudden eruption will be almost immediately
succeeded by great expansion and consequent fall of temperature, so
that within a few hours the heavy volatile metals begin to condense
and rapidly recede into their crater, and the faculæ in front and at
the sides will now stream inward to occupy this vacuum with constantly
accelerated velocity, pouring over the edges like the rush of waters
at the Falls of Niagara. As they sweep downward over the inner rim of
the funnel, these streams of faculæ will glow with increased whiteness,
and appear to be sharply cut off at their inner ends; but this is only
apparently so, and is due to the position of the observer, who looks
almost directly downward upon these descending streams. It is for
the same reason that the faculæ appear more brilliant when near the
borders of the solar disk (see page 109). Any good view of a sun-spot
when analyzed will show the streams of faculæ thus pouring inward,
and they are among the most peculiar and conspicuous phenomena
to be observed. The drawings of Professor Langley, reproduced in
the Popular Science Monthly for September, 1874, and July, 1885,
are particularly striking in their illustration of these effects,
though their significance and interpretation were not then at hand.

But while these heavy metallic vapors so rapidly condense and subside
in the forward or initial portion of the sun-spot under observation,
new depths of intensely-heated faculæ are generated behind, and these
operate with renewed energy upon the fresh surface of the solar core
in rear of the original seat of eruption; so that each sun-spot,
while in an active state, will exhibit two entirely distinct aspects,
the forward portion of the crater in a state of rapid condensation
and subsidence of the recently erupted metallic vapors, and with
inflowing streams of incandescent hydrogen from the front and sides,
and the rear portion of the crater up to its rearward wall, and even
streaming forth from beneath it, in a state of violent eruption. The
large volcanic craters of the Hawaiian Islands exhibit similar
partial eruptions and subsidences progressing simultaneously in the
same depths. The sudden formation of the great incandescent loops and
plumes to which Professor Langley calls especial attention, and which
have hitherto been so perplexing, can now be readily understood and
explained. If one of these inflowing streams be carried partially
down into and across the crater, and then caught, in its advance,
by the uprush in the central or rear portions of the cavity, it will
be at once swept upward alongside the ascending eruption, and either
scattered at its forward extremity into sprays and plumes, or else
thrown forward bodily in the form of a more or less complete loop. In
a sun-spot fifty thousand miles in diameter, such a loop, having a
long diameter of twenty thousand miles, if we give a speed to the
faculæ of seven thousand miles per minute, would be formed in about
seven minutes, during which the sun-spot would itself have advanced
less than five hundred miles across the face of the sun. The luminous
bridges which form so suddenly across portions of the crater may be
explained in a similar manner: they are streams of faculæ floated on
the nearly balanced uprush of metallic vapors from beneath.

It will thus be seen that a sun-spot is not merely a fixed eruption,
like a volcano, but rather a continuous series of eruptions, like
a line of activity following, for example, the great terrestrial
volcanic curve which extends up the western coast of America, across
the Pacific Ocean and Asia, and into Central and Southern Europe,
for during its progression its scene of action is constantly being
shifted to the rear; it is like a furrow cut by a plough, in which
the upturned sod is constantly falling in at one end of the furrow
while the plough is cutting a new furrow at the other, except that
in this case the plough is relatively fixed overhead, and the field
itself passes along beneath it. Consequently, the center of activity
of a sun-spot is only in its rear portions, generally considered, and
the whole sun-spot is gradually retreating, by successive filling up in
front and opening out behind, farther and farther to the rear,--that is
to say, to the east,--so that retardation relatively to the rotational
advance of the photosphere necessarily ensues.

But when the sun-spot is developed upon or near the equatorial
line this retardation is not so considerable, for the deeper layers
of the photosphere in those regions are slower to act and require
greater energy to affect them, so that all except deep and violent
eruptions fail to show themselves at the surface at all, and the
heated faculæ are carried directly forward along the surface of the
equatorial swell, so that the center of activity is driven forward
more rapidly than in the higher latitudes, and the rate of progression
is more nearly coincident with that of the photosphere. But if these
facts are correctly stated and explained, we may have to revise our
calculations of the sun's rotational period, for retardation to some
extent must occur in all cases, if in any.

A sun-spot, we thus perceive, is an elongated wave or ridge of eruption
along the rotational direction of the sun's body. Why, then, it may
be asked, is not this line of eruption continuous entirely around the
sun? For the same reason, it may be answered, that our own cyclones
are not continuous, though caused substantially in the same manner,
and that volcanic eruptions only occur at long intervals, though
the forces at work are continuous. Lowering of temperature follows
swiftly after eruption, and as the deeper structures of the solar
nucleus become gradually affected, instead of volatilization of the
outer layers of the surface, we will have diffused gaseous expansion
of large portions, and finally of the entire solar mass, which cannot
as a whole be volatilized by any conceivable planetary energy. We see
these operations exemplified in heating a bar of copper in a Bunsen
flame; the latter first turns green from surface volatilization of
the copper, but as the heat is communicated to the deeper structures
the green flame disappears, and the whole additional heat goes to
raise the temperature of the mass.

These processes in the sun are thus seen to be self-compensatory in
their nature. They are the means provided to distribute the restricted
areas of abnormally heated photosphere over the solar surface, and
finally to cause the absorption of the whole excess of heat in the
sun's central mass. The balance is so evenly maintained, however, that,
were all the planets equally distributed with reference to the sun's
surface, such sun-spots would be the exception and not the rule, and
their distribution would be equal and constant; but, as the planets
continually change their positions with reference to the sun and to
each other, only by some such provision of nature could the internal
structure of the sun be maintained without serious derangement, or,
indeed, final disruption. So nature distributes her stores of heat
upon the earth. These beautiful self-compensations we shall find
suddenly appearing, as we advance, in all parts of the field of
astronomical research.

It may seem like temerity to advance statements so positive and
specific as to the cause, constitution, and progression of sun-spots,
in the absence of any considerable accumulation of observations
to sustain them, but the few examples which we have noted are in
accordance with these views, and when attention is once called to the
basic principles on which they depend, observations will doubtless be
made in abundance to prove or disprove what has been here stated. The
mere fact of a differential rate of advance among sun-spots, as they
pass across the solar face, of itself demonstrates that the active
causes of these phenomena must be extra-solar, and if so, their only
possible dynamic source must be looked for in the planets, and the
remaining conclusions will of necessity follow as a corollary. We may
even, by merely examining an accurate drawing of a sun-spot, determine
its position and direction upon the solar sphere from which it was
delineated by its lines of active eruption and influx of faculæ,
and also whether it be a new spot or one which has passed entirely
beyond its active stage and is about to finally disappear.

As for the faculæ which striate the photosphere, the mottlings and
so-called "willow-leaves," any one who will quietly gaze downward
upon the turbid surface of the Mississippi or other similar river,
in mid-channel, will see plenty of such faculæ: the river is full of
them. The heavier, intermingled clay, slowly subsiding, is caught up in
the turmoil beneath the surface and swept upward in elongated ovals and
eddies, the larger swells nearly colorless, and others of all shades
of ochre and yellow, and the whole as richly mottled, sometimes, as
the variegated pattern of a Persian carpet. If we substitute for the
subsiding clay the rapidly sinking heavy metallic vapors, and enlarge
the scale from the dimensions of the river to those of the sun, we
will have the mottled solar surface with its kaleidoscopic changes,
the so-called "willow-leaves," and the faculæ in all their glory. A
careful study of the sun will show most clearly that only in some
such explanation as the present view affords can a rational basis
for its varied phenomena be found.

If the sun's equator were coincident with the plane of the planetary
orbits, it is obvious that all the planetary energies would be
directed, whatever the position of the planets around the sun,
immediately upon this equatorial great circle, and that, at each
revolution upon his axis, corresponding nearly to our calendar month,
the same part of his sphere would be exposed to these direct currents,
so that the intensity would be, in its aggregate, nearly a constant
quantity. But, by reason of the sun's axial inclination of seven
degrees to the plane of the planetary orbits, a far more complex and
important condition of affairs ensues. It will be seen at once that
the plane of the planetary orbits intersects the sun's equator at
opposite sides, and that, from a minimum of nothing, this line reaches
a maximum, twice in each circumference, of seven degrees, one north
and the other south of the equator, and that this arc of fourteen
degrees, thus traversed by every planet in its orbital rotation
around the sun, measures more than one hundred thousand miles from
north to south upon the solar surface, nearly one-half the distance
which separates the earth from the moon. If all the planets were in
conjunction or nearly so, on one side of the sun, for example, and in
the vertical plane of the sun's axis, they would continue to deliver
their electrical currents with their greatest intensity upon a single
point of his surface fifty-two thousand miles north of his equator,
while the opposite point, one hundred and four thousand miles distant,
would be unaffected by any direct currents at all. Conversely, if
in conjunction on the opposite side of the sun, they would continue
to deliver these currents upon a corresponding point fifty-two
thousand miles south of the equator; but if in conjunction in the
vertical plane transverse to the sun's axial inclination, these
currents on either side of the sun would be delivered directly upon
the solar equator. The importance of this will be understood when
it is considered that for many of our years such planets as Jupiter
and Saturn must continue to direct their currents upon a very slowly
changing point of the sun's surface, by reason of their vast annual
rotational period, while with the earth and the interior planets these
various points are struck with ever-increasing rapidity as the year
decreases in length with the different planets, the earth, Venus,
and Mercury. There is a solar equinoctial, so to speak, just as there
is a terrestrial equinoctial in which the sun crosses the line twice
each year, and the meteorological disturbances faintly shown on the
earth at such times are vastly increased on the sun, and rendered
far more complex by the interaction of many planets upon the sun,
instead of a single sun upon each planet. While our equinoctial has
to do with gravity and light and heat, and probably magnetism, the
solar equinoctial deals with the vast electrical streams which feed
its fires and set it boiling with furious energy, first at one point,
then at another, until the increment has been absorbed and adjusted,
and thus equalized throughout his mass. What a new interest this must
arouse in our study of sun-spots, faculæ, prominences, sun-storms,
and the vast panorama of solar action hung up before our astonished
eyes! A new world here awaits its Columbus.

But not only the planets thus gather, so to speak, electricity for
the sun's support from space; the moon also must do its part, as it
rotates in the same manner, subject to the sun, and has its own motion
through space. But an examination of the moon shows no atmosphere
and no aqueous matter visible to us, and also the singular fact
that it constantly presents one side only to the earth. R. Kalley
Miller, in his "Romance of Astronomy," article "The Moon," says,
"After an elaborate analysis, Professor Hausen, of Gotha, found that
it could be accounted for only by supposing that the side of the moon
nearest us was lighter than the other, and hence that its center of
gravity was not at its center of figure, but considerably nearer
the side of it which is always turned away from us. He calculates
the distance between these centers to be nearly thirty-five miles,
evidently a most important eccentricity, when we remember that the
radius of the moon is little over a thousand miles. It must have been
produced by some great internal convulsion after the moon assumed its
solid state; but the forces required to produce this disruption are
less than might at first sight appear necessary, owing to the fact
that the force of gravitation and the weight of matter are six times
less at the moon than with us." Those who are fond of the so-called
"Argument of Design" will be gratified to learn that, if the moon
had a rotation upon its own axis similar to that of the earth,
all life--past, present or future--would have been impossible on
that satellite or planet; and that, on the contrary,--provided she
always turns the same side of her surface to the earth,--it is quite
possible that air, water, and life may exist, or may have existed,
on the opposite side of the moon, but not otherwise. In fact, air and
water must now exist on the opposite side; and, since her whole supply
will thus be condensed upon half her surface or less, even with her
small force of gravity, it may be quite sufficient in quantity and
density for the support of animal, vegetable, or even human life. By
reason of this difference in the lunar center of gravity, the side
presented to the earth in physical position is similar to the summit
of a mountain upon the earth's surface two hundred miles high, and
surely we would not expect to find much air or water or life at that
altitude. But the opposite side would resemble a champagne country
at the foot of this enormous mountain, and might be well fitted for
human existence. Now, we know that similar electricities repel each
other, and air or gases charged with similar electricities are equally
self-repellent. Professor Tyndall, in his "Lessons in Electricity,"
says, "The electricity escaping from a point or flame into the air
renders the air self-repulsive. The consequence is, that when the
hand is placed over a point mounted on the prime conductor of a good
machine, a cold blast is distinctly felt.... The blast is called the
'electric wind.' Wilson moved bodies by its action; Faraday caused
it to depress the surface of a liquid; Hamilton employed the reaction
of the electric wind to make pointed wires rotate. The wind was also
found to promote evaporation."

While electrical repulsion is doubtless analogous to, and correlative
with, the attraction of gravitation, this force, and even gravity
itself, has been sometimes interpreted as derived from the mutually
interacting molecules of space itself. We may even learn somewhat
of how such repulsions of similar and attractions of opposite
electrospheres might occur. We constantly speak of positive
and negative electricity as though these were different fluids,
but such expressions are employed only in the same manner as the
analogous terms, heat and cold. We know, of course, that cold is the
relative absence of heat, the dividing line being not a fixed, but a
constantly changing one, so that one body is cold to another by reason
of relative, and not absolute, deprivation of heat. It is well known,
however, that cold, which is purely a negative state, manifests the
same apparent radiant energy as heat. A vessel near an iceberg is
exposed to a wave of cold, precisely as of heat from a heated body at
the same distance. This, of course, is due to abstraction and not to
increment. All space being occupied by attenuated matter in a state
of unstable electrical equilibrium, as we say, which simply means
a condition ready to be raised or lowered in tension by absorption
from or into outside media, all concrete bodies floating in that
space must have an electrical potential either equal to, or higher,
or else lower than that of their surrounding space. A solitary body in
space, if we can conceive of such, in either a higher or lower state
of electrical tension, would be drawn upon from all sides to equalize
the distribution and restore the general average. But if two bodies
occupy the same field, and are widely different from each other in
electrical potential, one higher and the other lower than that of
space, this distribution will be towards each other, and must be
manifested by mutual attraction. But if, on the contrary, these two
bodies are both equally higher or lower than the spatial average,
they have nothing to give to each other, but have this difference
to give to or receive only from outer space, and hence they will be
drawn apart or, as we say, mutually repelled. The case is similar to
what we see in the case of bodies of water at various levels. Suppose
there be a lake of a fixed level, and communicating with it and with
each other, by open channels, two ponds of water occupying an island
in the middle of the lake. If one of these ponds be higher in level
and the other lower than the lake, their waters will rapidly converge,
the higher flowing into the lower; but if both are at the same level,
and higher than the lake, they will flow apart into the lake. Or, if
both are at the same level, and lower than the lake, the water of the
latter will equally flow from outside into both ponds, and their waters
will still be held separate from each other. The analogies of these
various levels may be pursued to any desired extent, as electrical
tensions find their most exact analogies in the pressures of bodies
of water at different levels and of different quantities, and these
analogies are those most constantly used in the interpretation of
such electrical phenomena.

The great electrical activity of the electrospheres of the earth and
moon, while they discharge their tremendous currents directly into
the sun, at the same time must cause their similarly electrified
atmospheres to mutually repel each other, while gravity continues
to operate to maintain the earth and moon at their fixed distances
from each other, and to retain their gaseous envelopes around their
own bodies. The result must be that these similarly electrified
atmospheres repel each other with a force proportioned to their masses
of atmosphere and the intensity of the electricities of each. The
moon's axial rotation being completed but once in twenty-eight days,
and that of the earth once in each day, and the moon's mass and volume
being so much less than those of the earth, whatever of electrified air
or moisture she may have (and she must have both, proportionate to her
attributes) would have been driven as by a cyclone to the opposite side
of the moon and there retained. Now, with an atmosphere and water only
on one side of the moon, and that the side opposite the earth, it is
obvious that a rotation on her axis at all resembling that of the earth
would carry every part of her surface, at each complete rotation, from
a region of air and moisture into one deprived of both, and in such
a condition she would of necessity be deprived of both life and its
possibility; hence, as the laws of nature compel the lunar atmosphere
and moisture to reside permanently on the side always opposite the
earth, a co-ordinate arrest of the moon's axial motion with reference
to the earth could alone compensate for such a state of things,
and, curiously enough, we find as a solitary exception, compared
with the planets, that such is the case. The moon unquestionably has
both atmosphere and water on its opposite side. In his recent work,
"In the High Heavens," Professor Ball reviews the physical conditions
of the other planets as possible abodes of life. He pronounces against
the moon because night and day would each be a fortnight in length;
but this is surely no objection, for even in Norway and Greenland such
nights and days are not uncommon at different seasons, and thousands
of human beings, even as at present constituted on earth, spend their
lives there in content and happiness. That the moon also would be
terribly scorched by the long day and frozen by the long night does
not necessarily follow, for the atmosphere of Mars, that author says,
"to a large extent mitigates the fierceness with which the sun's rays
would beat down on the globe if it were devoid of such protection." As
the moon's opposite face must have a double quota both of atmosphere
and clouds, the difficulty will be correspondingly less than on Mars;
and as for the "lightness" of bodies on the moon, they would probably
get along quite as well as mosquitoes and like "birds of prey" in the
marshes along our coasts. The author refers constantly to our bodies;
for example, "Could we live on a planet like Neptune?" No, we could
not; we would be dead before we got there. Nor could we live in the
bark of a tree, or at the bottom of the ocean, or in a globule of
serum; but living beings are found there nevertheless. The principle
is that wherever life is possible there we may expect to find life;
and surely life is, or has been, or will be possible, not only on
the moon, so far as our knowledge of physical conditions can go, but
also on some of the other planets. Of course each planet has its life
stage, but this applies not only to the earth, but to all the other
planets as well, and not only to the planets of our own system, but
to those of all other solar systems. Each has had, or will have, its
stage in which life is possible, and these planets may be like human
habitations, in which whole races at times migrate from one home to
another. There is no conceivable reason why this may not be the general
law of creation, and every analogy leads us to believe that it is so.

It has been recently announced that, from telescopic observations,
the atmosphere of Mars must be at least as attenuated as that among
the highest mountainous regions of the earth, if this planet has any
atmosphere at all. That it must be far less dense than that of the
earth at sea-level is obvious, for the mass and volume of Mars are
very much less than those of our own planet; but that Mars is devoid
of a gaseous envelope or atmosphere is contrary to what we know of all
sidereal physics. The sun, the fixed stars, the comets, the nebulæ,
and even the meteorolithic fragments which fall upon the earth, all
show the same elementary chemical constitution as the earth itself,
and we cannot believe that Mars alone is differently constituted from
every other body we have been able to examine. We have direct evidence,
on this planet, of polar snows and their melting away under the sun's
heat; we see the apparent areas of sea and land; it has its moons as
the earth has hers, and exhibits all the characteristic phenomena of
the earth and other planets. All sidereal bodies that we know of,
except, perhaps, our moon, which exception we have fully accounted
for, are found to be surrounded by gaseous envelopes or atmospheres
of some sort. The sun, the fixed stars, the nuclei of comets, the
condensing nebulæ, the planets Jupiter and the earth, which are
those under our most direct observation, and even the meteorites,
when examined, reveal the presence of many times their own volumes of
independent atmospheric gases; and whatever may be the theory of the
origin or development of Mars, it must have been subjected to the same
influences, the same environment, and the same processes of creation as
those of our solar system generally; and that this body alone should
possess no gaseous envelope--for the denial of atmosphere denies,
at the same time, the presence of any or all surrounding gases--is
quite incredible. Only the most positive, direct, and long-continued
proofs of such fact could be accepted, and even then the history of all
scientific progress shows that what are believed to be facts themselves
fluctuate like fancies till, by their accumulated force, they solidify
into universally accepted demonstration. The fact, moreover, that
the atmospheres of the smaller planets are more attenuated than our
own and those of the larger ones denser has no bearing, in itself,
on the probability of the existence of life on these other planets,
for in our own atmosphere oxygen, which is the efficient element,
is diluted with four times its quantity of inert nitrogen. These
proportions doubtless vary largely in other atmospheres, so that
the oxygen may be much richer in some and far poorer, relatively,
in others. The mere fact that the presence of nitrogen, probably, and
aqueous vapor, certainly, depends on the gravity of the mass of each
planet, while the oxygen is due to electrolytic decomposition induced
by the combined volume, mass, and rotation, and other causes,--such
as the axial inclination of such planets, for example,--renders
these variations in the constitution of planetary atmospheres a
certainty. As Mars has a diameter much more than one-half that of
the earth, and a diurnal rotational period nearly the same, while his
mass, which controls the action of gravity, is only about one-ninth
that of the earth (see Appleton's Cyclopædia), it is obvious that his
oxygen-gathering power, compared with that for accumulating nitrogen
and aqueous vapor, is much higher than that of the earth, and we should
expect to find there an attenuated atmosphere very rich in oxygen,
and with a relatively smaller proportion of aqueous vapor, or even
water, on his surface. Such seem to be the facts as far as observed.

In operating an electric machine the strength of the current is
directly proportionate to the speed of rotation,--that is to say,
to the velocity of the generating surface; for example, of the
Wimshurst induction machine it is stated (page 63, "Electricity
in the Service of Man"), "These four-and-one-half inch discharges
take place in regular succession at every two and a half turns of
the handle." It is also a well-established law of electrolysis that
"The amount of decomposition effected by the current is in proportion
to the current strength." Professor Ferguson ("Electricity," page
225) says of the voltameter, an instrument devised by Faraday,
and used for testing the strength of currents by the proportionate
decomposition of acidulated water, "Mixed gases rise into the tube,
and the quantity of gas given off in a given time measures the
strength of the current." Roughly estimating the diameter of Mars at
five-eighths, the surface velocity at three-fifths, and the mass at
one-ninth those of the earth, this planet should have an atmosphere
containing about sixty per cent. of oxygen and forty of nitrogen, with
a barometric pressure at sea-level of about six and one-half inches of
mercury. This would be an excellent atmosphere,--about equal in its
quota of oxygen for each respiration to that of the higher areas of
Persia, a great country for roses. The aqueous vapors lying low and
near the surface would serve as a vaporous screen to concentrate and
retain the sun's heat and retard radiation from that planet. Nothing
in particular seems to be the matter with Mars.

On the contrary, the mass of Jupiter is so great, and his attraction
of gravity so powerful, that it is only by his exceedingly rapid
diurnal rotation (once in less than ten hours) that it is possible
for him to accumulate any effective percentage of oxygen at all. But
there is certainly plenty of water there.

We may approximately compute, in general terms, the proportion
of oxygen in the atmospheres of the other planets in the same
way. Neptune, it is true, is so far distant from the sun that the
solar orb only "appears about the same magnitude as Venus when at
its greatest brilliancy, as viewed from the earth," but we must not
forget that "the intensity of the sun's light would be more than ten
thousand times greater than that of Venus" (Professor Dunkin, in "The
Midnight Sky"). Unless the moon gathers a portion of the earth's oxygen
(the planetary satellites, like Saturn's rings, thus constituting
in their rotations a constituent part of the planets themselves),
the percentage of this gas in her atmosphere must be exceedingly
small, for her axial rotation has a period of a whole lunar month,
being the same as that of her revolution around the earth as a center.

The absence of apparent atmosphere and moisture from the visible lunar
surface has already been mentioned and explained. The means by which
this fact has been approximately determined are described by Professor
Dunkin, in "The Midnight Sky," as follows: "Among the many proofs of
the non-existence of a lunar atmosphere, it may be mentioned that
no water can be seen; at least there is not a sufficient quantity
in any one spot so as to be visible from the earth. Again, there are
no clouds; for if there were, we should immediately discover them by
the variable light and shade which they would produce. But one great
proof of the absence of any large amount of vapor being suspended over
the lunar surface is the sudden extinction of a star when occulted by
the moon. The author has been a constant observer of these phenomena,
and, though his experience is of long standing, he has never observed
an occultation of a star or planet, especially at the unilluminated
edge of a young moon, without having his conviction confirmed that
there is no appreciable lunar atmosphere.... Professor Challis has
subjected the results of a large number of these observations to a
severe mathematical test, but he has not been able to discover the
slightest trace of any effect produced by a lunar atmosphere."

In Appleton's Cyclopædia, article "The Moon," it is stated that
"Schröter (about 1800) claimed to have discovered indications of
vegetation on the surface of the moon. These consist of certain traces
of a greenish tint which appear and reappear periodically; much as
the white spots covering the polar regions of Mars.... As we are able,
under the most favorable conditions, to use upon the moon telescopic
powers which have the effect of bringing the satellite to within one
hundred and fifty to one hundred and twenty miles of us, we should
doubtless notice any such marked changes on her surface as the passage
of the seasons produces, for example, on our own globe." Very recently
(August 12, 1894), it has been stated, Professor Gathmann has observed
a peculiar green spot about forty by seventy miles in area near the
crater of Tycho Brahe, "on the northwestern edge of the satellite's
upper limb," which had disappeared twenty-two hours afterwards.

We understand, of course, that the moon's librations, by the variation
of position of the lunar body, enable us to see, at times, around
the edge of this satellite somewhat, so that, instead of observing
only one-half, we can in this way see nearly six-tenths of her
surface, but not at the same time, of course. When the moon is dark
it occupies a position between the earth and the sun, and only its
opposite face is illuminated. In this position the attraction of
solar gravity and the attraction of the electrically opposite solar
electrosphere both accumulate their forces upon the moon's atmosphere
in the same line as the repulsion of the earth's similar electricity,
so that the lunar moisture and atmosphere are, at this part of her
subordinate orbit, most powerfully forced away from the direction
of the earth. As the moon now proceeds towards her first quarter,
the terrestrial repulsion drives her atmosphere radially outward,
while solar gravity and electrical attraction tend to hold it in the
direction of the sun. The result will be an electrospheric libration,
so to speak, and the moon's atmosphere and moisture will be carried
around towards its illuminated face and, to some extent, will overlap
the area of terrestrial repulsion. But as the moon advances this will
gradually diminish, soon cease, and finally be reversed as it again
approaches darkness. We can now understand why the green surface, if
it really was due to vegetation, appeared along the lunar margin at
the time described above, and also that the observation of planetary
occultations "at the unilluminated edge of the young moon" was the
very worst part of the moon and its orbit in which to look for air
or moisture; as the sun's influence is then directly away from the
unilluminated surface of the moon, and his "pull" would have, in fact,
still further denuded the very portion most persistently examined,
and where this absence of atmosphere was especially noted.

When considering the transference of energy from the peripheral
regions of the solar system to the center, its conversion there into
a new form of molecular force, and its subsequent distribution, we
find a curious and instructive parallel in the action of the reflex
nervous system of animal life. This system is one in which the brain
or other conscious center of nerve-energy takes no part. Tickle
the foot of a child, for example, and its whole muscular system is
thrown into uncontrollable convulsions of laughter. Here an exciting
contact with the terminal filaments of the afferent or sensory nerves
is rapidly carried into the local nerve-center of this part of the
system,--that is, the sensory column of the spinal cord. This center
of ganglionic nerve-matter lies directly against the corresponding
motor mass, both freely communicating with each other. The sensory
current passing into its central ganglion undergoes some peculiar
change of character, probably one of intensification, such as is
observed in the action of the condenser of an electrical machine,
through which sensory ganglion, thus raised in potential, it passes to
the motor ganglion adjacent, where it is instantly transformed into
an entirely different form of energy. The sensory character has now
entirely disappeared, and it has been converted into and is flashed
forth as motor energy to the different muscles of the body, which are
immediately contracted, the violent molecular motion of the fibres
being at once converted into muscular motion in mass. The changes are
entirely analogous to those we see in the different conversions of
energy in our solar system. Considering the surface of the body as a
planetary electrosphere, it is acted upon by excitation from without;
currents of energy are engendered, which are at once transmitted to
the sensory ganglion, corresponding to the hydrogen atmosphere or
electrosphere of the sun; intensification of action here ensues, the
current passing through this ganglion or atmosphere into the solar body
itself, which corresponds to the motor ganglion; both ganglia are now
highly excited; the electrical force is converted into the radiant
molecular motor energy of heat and light in the sun and muscular
excitement in the body, and these are flashed forth and find scope
for their action within the body of the subject or upon the surface
of the planets, which lie, like the muscular structure of the body,
within the genetic electrosphere where, acted upon from without and
by agencies entirely external, moving contact has induced the primary
molecular action, which was then instantaneously transferred to the
center, there converted into another form, that of motor energy,
and thence sent forth to produce action in the muscles of the body
in the one case, and in the other upon the planetary bodies and their
satellites and other structures which occupy surrounding space.








CHAPTER V.

THE DISTRIBUTION AND CONSERVATION OF SOLAR ENERGY.


What, then, becomes of the light and heat flashed forth with
eternal energy from the fiery waves of the sun's incandescent
atmosphere? Professor Ball ("In the High Heavens") says, "Much
of what has been said with regard to light may be repeated with
regard to heat. We know that radiant heat consists of ethereal
undulations of the same character as the waves of light. Hence we
see that the heat or the light radiated from a glowing gas is mainly
provided at the expense of the energy possessed by the molecules
in virtue of their internal oscillations." Conversely, of course,
the ethereal undulations thus induced by high molecular motion in
the heated gas or vapor must disappear in so-called absorption or
transference by contact with other molecules, themselves devoid of
such specific internal oscillations. The heat motion then disappears
as heat by its conversion into work, just as the motion of a belt
in a mill disappears in the work of the machine which it drives. One
two-hundred-and-thirty-two-millionth part of the radiant solar energy,
we know, is caught by the flying planets of our system in the forms of
heat and light, adapted to sustain life and its continued potentiality,
and we know that this solar energy is the sole source of all the
development and maintenance of the planets as the possible abodes of
organic life, past, present or future.

But what of the vast total, of which we consume so minute a
fraction? It is true that, in addition to the planets, space is
occupied by many small meteoric bodies, which manifest themselves to us
as shooting stars and meteorites, but the mass of these is too trifling
to be estimated. Professor Helmholtz, in his "Popular Scientific
Lectures," says, "According to Alexander Herschel's estimates, each
stone is, on an average, at a distance of four hundred and fifty miles
from its neighbors." When these bodies enter our atmosphere by force of
the earth's attraction they are heated by its atmospheric friction to
incandescence, and in most cases are even volatilized before reaching
the earth's surface. The vast volumes of solar heat and light, however,
are poured forth from the sun indiscriminately in all directions into
illimitable space, wherein all the masses of concrete matter, including
the stars, are relatively far less in volume than the flying motes of
the purest morning air which sparkle in the flood of light sent forth
by the rising sun. Is all the rest wasted? Professor Balfour Stewart,
in his work "The Conservation of Energy," says, "If this be the fate of
the high-temperature energy of the universe, let us think for a moment
what will happen to its visible energy. We have spoken already about
a medium pervading space, the office of which appears to be to degrade
and ultimately extinguish all differential motion, just as it tends to
reduce and ultimately equalize all difference in temperature. Thus,
the universe would ultimately become an equally heated mass, utterly
worthless as far as the production of work is concerned, since such
production depends upon difference of temperature."

It is obvious that the starting-point taken by the author last
quoted, but which, nevertheless, is in accordance with the views
now generally prevalent, is diametrically opposed to that sought
to be established in this work. Professor Stewart takes the sun's
inherent energy as the initial point of departure, and reasons from
that as to the final consequence when all its light and heat shall
have been distributed or dissipated into the attenuated medium which
occupies space, and which will be thus slowly heated until all space
has been raised in temperature to that of the last dying sun, when
all will thenceforth remain unchanged and unchangeable, silent, dark,
and dead, to all eternity. On the contrary, the purpose of the present
work is to establish a directly opposite principle, based, however, on
demonstrated scientific facts and not on theory, that the medium which
pervades all space was originally in the same equally and universally
potential state (with its molecules raised to a tension constituting
an unstable equilibrium) in which, practically, Professor Stewart's
argument leaves it finally, and that this universal molecular energy
of position was permanently maintained by the employment of the forces
which afterwards, transformed into light and heat, were shed abroad
by the sun in the work of again overcoming the intermolecular tension
of cohesion, and that the light and heat of the sun are merely caught
up again by these same or other molecules and successively employed in
the same manner, while the planetary electrospheres utilize these same
forces of internal tension in the generation of electricity, which,
sent to the sun, is converted into light and heat, and these are again
transferred to their original source. The rotation of the planets is
the grand exciting cause, and the process, in its complete cycle of
development, has live stages: first, planetary generation; second,
transference by currents of electricity to the sun; third, conversion
into light and heat; fourth, emission; and, fifth, reabsorption and
conversion again into molecular energy of position. All space is thus
found to be pervaded by extremely attenuated vapors, which contain
the elemental constituents out of which suns and planets are evolved
under favorable circumstances of development, and, among other vapors,
aqueous vapor, and that these are the agency upon which the planetary
electrospheres operate in their generation of electrical currents, and
which vapors, in turn, by absorption of the solar energy of radiation,
again transform this energy into mutually balanced electric potential,
until it is once more disengaged as electricity by the rotating
planetary electrospheres, and so on in a constant circuit forever
repeated. It differs from perpetual motion, however, in that the
planetary rotation is the external and not the internal generative
cause, since the electrical forces neither cause nor control these
motions; they belong to the realm of gravity. The disassociation,
moreover, is electrical and not chemical disassociation. The tensions
are against cohesion and not against chemical affinity; are, in fact,
similar to those which constitute our atmosphere a vast electrical
reservoir; and the aqueous vapors, through all their changes,
permanently remain as aqueous vapors, except those condensed portions
disassociated by electrolytic action at the electrospheric poles, and
which have no relation to the attenuated vapors of space, except in
that the latter are their sources of supply. The process is analogous
to what we see around us at all times in the atmosphere. While the
process described by Professor Stewart resembles the emptying of the
inherent water of a cloud, in the form of rain, into an ocean which
never yields up its water again, so that, when the cloud has rained
itself out, it is gone forever, the processes here sketched are like
the vapors which are caught up by the heated air, carried over the
thirsty lands, distributed in rain to fertilize and vivify them,
then gathered in a thousand tiny rills from countless fountains,
again descending to the sea and again carried up in vapor, and so on
over and over in unceasing round. It is the difference between an
old-fashioned flintlock musket and a modern magazine rifle, except
that the magazine is always full.

This great ocean of space was primordially charged with these
potential vapors; it is the constitution of space itself. We are so
accustomed to consider space as empty, and that it is nothingness,
the antithesis of something or anything, that it is a negation or
a blank, that it requires an effort to even think of it as a fully
stocked establishment with all the goods necessary for use or ornament,
in the latest styles and of prime quality, only not made up, and that
all our suns and worlds are merely tailoring establishments where
the operatives cut and fit and make them up to order. When more goods
are wanted they have to go to the store.

Is space, then, eternal, and is this constant round of energies to
be eternal? If one is eternal, so is the other, and surely nothing
can be more eternal than space, and we cannot conceive of any
other space than this space. Out of it came all created things,
and so long as the orbs rotate without retardation, so long will
these interchanges go on without impairment, and that they do so
rotate is the necessary corollary of the fact that they ever began
to rotate. If rotation, on the contrary, was imparted by special
creative power, then the same power established the laws by which
they rotate, and took cognizance of resistance as well. Whatever the
impulse was, it still remains; whatever caused the rotation to begin
maintains it; if the cause is eternal the rotation may be eternal;
and, in any case, its period must be measured by cycles of æons,
to which the allotted lifetime of a dying sun--a few million years,
perhaps--is but as the sunburst of a morning-glory flower to the
hoary age of a mighty planet. Compared with the popular view of the
sun's life-period, we may formulate the terms of an equation in which
the sun's mass, compared with the realms of infinite space, is as
the sun's lifetime--on a basis of contraction of his volume--to the
lifetime which actually is to be. As one of the terms is practically
infinite, so must be the answer to the problem. Professor Stewart says,
"We cannot help believing that there is a material medium of some
kind between the sun and the earth; indeed, the undulatory theory
of light requires this belief." It has already been shown that the
transmission of electricity also requires it, but that there must be
a medium quite different from the undulatory ether. Professor Proctor
("Mysteries of Time and Space") says, "We may admit the possibility
that the aqueous vapor and carbon compounds are present in stellar
or interplanetary space." Again he says, "Assuming, as we well may,
that space is really occupied by attenuated vapors." The same writer
says further, "To this end all thoughtful study of the mechanism
seems to tend (associating, perhaps, our visible universe with others,
permeating it as the ether of space permeates the densest solids, and
in turn with others so permeated by it); there may be that constant
interchange, that perpetual harmony, of which Goethe sung:


       'Balanced worlds from change defending,
        While everywhere diffused is harmony unending.'"


The light and heat poured forth from the sun are, as stated, in
the form of radiated energy. They penetrate the attenuated vapors
as far as vision extends, and doubtless farther, but they cannot
reach the boundaries of space, for even the mind of man cannot reach
those limits. Aqueous vapor absorbs heat; we know this without any
demonstration, for the radiated heat of the earth is arrested by
a veil of clouds, so that on cloudy nights frost will not form. So
also the sun shining into water will raise its temperature, as in
a glass globe, and such absorption of heat by aqueous vapors or
water would be much more manifest were not a large part employed in
loosening the tension of the constituent molecules, since, when thus
employed, it is not manifest as sensible heat. Professor Tyndall, in
"The Forms of Water," states that "The quantity of heat which would
raise the temperature of a pound of water one degree would raise the
temperature of a pound of iron ten degrees." Professor Stewart, in
"The Conservation of Energy," says, "That peculiar motion which is
imparted by heat when absorbed into a body is, therefore, one variety
of molecular energy.... Part of the energy of absorbed heat is spent in
pulling asunder the molecules of the body under the attractive force
which binds them together, and thus a store of energy of position is
laid up, which disappears again after the body is cooled.

"Heat will only be changed into work while it passes from a body of
high temperature to one of low.... At very high temperatures it is
possible that most compounds are decomposed, and the temperature
at which this takes place, for any compound, has been termed its
temperature of disassociation. Heat energy is changed into electrical
separation when tourmalines and certain other crystals are heated." It
may be added that it is also changed into electrical energy by the
operation of all electrical machines, as molecular motions are all
mutually interconvertible, and heat itself is only a mode of such
motion. Of radiant energy, the same writer says, "This form of energy
[radiant heat] is converted into absorbed heat whenever it falls upon
an opaque substance ... and heats it. It is a curious question to ask
what becomes of the radiant light from the sun that is not absorbed
either by the planets of our system or by any of the stars. We can
only reply to such a question that, as far as we can judge from
our present knowledge, the radiant energy that is not absorbed must
be conceived to be traversing space at the rate of one hundred and
eighty-eight thousand miles a second."

We know, of course, that aqueous vapors are partially opaque to heat
rays, as the radiated heat of the earth is partially arrested by
such vapors in the atmosphere, but they are apparently transparent to
the rays of light. But we know that this cannot be entirely true in
fact, for light rays only differ from heat rays in the comparative
length of their waves or impulses, while rays of light are always
accompanied--when emitted by a thermally incandescent body--by a much
larger number of those of heat. As a body is raised in temperature
radiant dark rays first appear; these being raised higher, become
visible as light, and new dark rays are radiated behind them, and this
continues till after the state of highest incandescence is reached
and the invisible chemical rays beyond the spectrum appear. It is
like a crowd surging forth in flight from the doors of a building;
as the speed of those in front increases to a run, others follow more
slowly in the mass, and as these gain speed others continue to follow,
while the great mass of laggards still trails along in a lengthening
line to the rear. The perception of light is itself merely due to the
constitution of the optic apparatus of the observer, which only takes
cognizance of vibrations radiated from the middle portion of the scale,
just as the ear does with sounds, and not to any actual difference in
their mode of production. That heat rays and light rays are identical
in constitution can be readily shown by the experiment described by
Professor Tyndall in his "Forms of Water," in which an opaque screen
of iodine solution in bisulphide of carbon was employed to arrest, in
a beam of light, all the light waves (to which it is entirely opaque),
while transmitting the dark rays. These non-luminous rays are then
converged by a lens: "Let us, then, by means of our opaque solution,
isolate our dark waves and converge them on the cotton. It explodes
as before.... At the same dark focus sheets of platinum are raised
to vivid redness; ... a diamond is caused to glow like a star, being
afterwards gradually dissipated." Sir William Herschel (see article
"Spectrum," Appleton's Cyclopædia) says, "If we call light those rays
which illuminate objects, and radiant heat those which heat bodies,
it may be inquired whether light be essentially different from radiant
heat. In answer to which I would suggest that we are not allowed by the
rules of philosophizing to admit of two different causes to explain
certain effects, if they may be accounted for by one."... "Tyndall,
by similar experiments, found that the thermal energy of the invisible
radiation of a very powerful electric light is eight times that of
the visible.... Seebeck showed that the position of maximum heat
in the spectrum changes with the nature of the prism and sometimes
occurs in the red." Melconi, with prisms of alcohol and water, found
it in the yellow. Athermic bands are also found in the heat-spectrum,
corresponding to the Fraunhofer lines seen in the visible spectrum.

We may illustrate this successive development of more and more rapid
light-waves by conceiving of a harp having musical strings of various
length and thickness, but not strung up, so that, when swept by the
hand, the vibrations are felt, but no musical tones are produced. If,
now, all the strings are simultaneously and gradually stretched
while under continuous vibration, we will first hear the hum of
the lighter strings, but deep down in the scale; and as the tension
gradually increases the pitch of these will rise higher and higher
and be succeeded by other new tones below, until the whole register
is simultaneously sounded. And if the tension be further increased,
the vibrations of the upper strings will gradually grow so rapid
that the ear can take no cognizance of them, corresponding to the
invisible chemical rays of the spectrum, while the middle strings
will be sounding loudly, and others will be slowly vibrating below the
musical scale, but without sound, corresponding to the invisible heat
rays. In addition to this gradual ascent of pitch along the scale,
however, there is reason to believe that sympathetic vibrations are
induced in the spectrum of thermal and chemical light corresponding to
the over-tones in music and to those hidden rhythms which differentiate
the "timbre" of one kind of musical instrument from that of another,
so that a definite wave-length will not only repeat itself among
adjacent molecules, but will give rise to harmonious vibrations
quite different in amplitude and velocity. An example of this is
found in some of the phenomena of phosphorescence and fluorescence,
in which chemical rays totally invisible are able, under suitable
conditions, to excite molecular movements corresponding to parts
of the visible spectrum, and quite different in wave-lengths and
in rapidity. This process is precisely the converse of what we
perceive in thermal light; in the latter case the colors ascend,
loaded with invisible heat rays; in the former they descend, loaded
with invisible chemical rays, only noted, perhaps, by their actinic
action on the photographic plate. Others, as the sulphide of calcium
paints and the like, repeat their own vibrations for many hours, and
we find in certain chemical salts of some rare metals, as lanthanum
and cerium, the curious property of suddenly raising the whole scale,
as in a recently introduced gas-lamp, in which a skeleton mantle of
these oxides glows with a wondrously beautiful white light under the
relatively low temperature of a small Bunsen burner; similar phenomena
are manifested in the behavior of electric discharges in attenuated
gases, as well as in what is known to children as "fox-fire," wood
undergoing slow decomposition in damp places, or in the self-luminous
secretions (corresponding, perhaps, to ptomaines or like products)
of glow-worms and other animals. If we ever--as we probably soon
shall--reach that point where we can illuminate our dwellings with
"cold candles," as the inhabitants of tropical countries carry about a
few fire-flies in a paper box for a lantern on dark nights, it must be
by the study of these phenomena. But meantime "Old Sol" will continue
to discharge his accumulating stores of both heat and light, for both
these are essential, not only for use upon the planets, but throughout
all the realms of space. In the transformation into and emission of
his radiant energy the sun is not a chemical engine, but a mill,--one
of those which "grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small."

The difference between radiated thermal light and heat is obviously
one of degree only and not of kind. The undulations of light may
be compared to the thrust of a rapier, and the more massive waves
of radiant heat to the blow of a bludgeon, but the same resistance
which arrests the advance of the one must retard and finally arrest
that of the other, if sufficiently extended. Within the limits of
a space in which Professor Stewart conceives that the first rays of
light which ever flashed forth at the dawn of creation, in the primal
æons of the universe, are still to this day, along their original
lines of radiation, "traversing space at the rate of one hundred
and eighty-eight thousand miles per second," there must certainly
be room enough and absorption enough (which even a few yards of mist
will supply) to curb these runaway steeds somewhere along their lines
of flaming passage. At that very point they are at work acting upon
the molecules of the attenuated vapors of space, and assisting to
re-establish the potential energy which has there been converted, into
another form of force by the planetary rotations of the solar systems
of those distant regions. By the law of the diffusion of gases, and
that of the diffusion or transference of heat-energy from molecule
to molecule, the vast realms of interstellar space must tend to be
all brought into approximate uniformity of tensions, and the force
abstracted at those points of space occupied by the relatively few
and insignificant solar systems will be returned, not directly at
the identical places where such solar systems may exist, but at every
part of space to which their radiant energy extends. As we give from
our own supplies to other systems for their support, so they, in turn,
give back again to us. It is said that in the earliest days of creation
the stars sang together; they still sing together, planets and suns, as


       "Jura answers from her misty shroud
        Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud."


When old Earth lifts his brimming beaker from the great crystal sea
and drains it to the good health of all the stars of heaven, they each
respond with fiery energy, and by their merry twinkle we may know
how highly they appreciate the toast. We are all one family,--but
what a family! Comets, planets, double stars, variable stars, stars
of complementary colors, blue, yellow, orange, and red stars, stars
which blaze up in sudden conflagration, apparently new stars, nebulæ
half star and half vapor, nebulæ all vapor and others all stars, the
vast milky-way like a wondrous river of hundreds of millions of solar
systems, the insulated stars scattered through space like watchmen
on the distant hills beyond the city walls, streams of stars, stars
which are parting from each other in space like scattering families,
and those which travel together in groups like pioneers in a strange
country,--all these and doubtless other unknown types and forms
compose this sidereal family. Will they fall into their categories as
lawful subjects, so as to be properly classified in a single scheme
of the visible order of creation, or shall we fail to interpret their
apparent mysteries when we apply the same principles which have been
successfully applied to the phenomena of our own solar system? Let
us see.

In examining the sun, we find that a beam of its light passed
through a prism is thrown upon the wall in a wedge-shaped streak of
rainbow-tinted colors. Fraunhofer, many years ago, found that this
spectrum was crossed at irregular intervals by a series of dark lines,
of variable width and distance apart, of which he catalogued more
than five hundred. These lines were subsequently found to correspond
in the aggregate, in their position in the spectrum, with a series of
bright lines of different colors which formed the separate spectra
of various metals when burned, in vapor or powder, in the flame of
an alcohol lamp. Each of these transverse lines was found to have a
fixed and invariable position in the extended scale of the spectrum,
and scarcely any lines of the different elements are alike; so that,
when the spectrum is properly magnified under telescopic observation
and the lines identified, we have the means of determining the
presence or absence of such elements in the vaporous constitution
of any incandescent body by examination of its spectrum. In this way
many of our terrestrial elements are found to exist in the sun,--so
many, in fact, that we know that the sun's nucleus, or core, must
be composed substantially of the same elements, the same sort of
matter, as exists on earth,--that we are, in fact, "a chip of the
old block." But it was found--and this is the real basis of spectrum
analysis--that if a certain metal or other element be burned in the
flame of an alcohol lamp, and a more brilliant flame of the same metal
or element burned in another lamp be observed through the first flame,
it will be seen that, "while the general illumination of the spectrum
is increased, the previous bright lines characterizing the element
are now replaced by dark lines or lines relatively very faint; in
a word, the spectrum characteristic of the given element is exactly
reversed" (Appleton's Cyclopædia, article "Spectrum Analysis"). We have
referred to this fact above in considering the origin of sun-spots,
showing that they are due to increased heat acting upon the core of
the sun so as to volatilize an abnormally large proportion of the
elements usually in a more condensed state upon the surface of the
solar body beneath its hydrogen envelope. These vapors, thus raised
in temperature, are driven upward by their volatilization into the
incandescent atmosphere of hydrogen, and the vaporous matters in the
higher strata thus produce the characteristic absorption bands of
these elements, while the overheated vapors, by a vast uprush from
beneath, hurl aside the more highly heated hydrogen above to appear
as faculæ around the sun-spot, the cooler upper layers of hydrogen
following downward the subsiding vaporous metallic uprush as it sinks
back beneath the photospheric level.

It is obvious that by similar spectrum analysis we may determine
to a large extent the constitution of the fixed stars and other
self-luminous bodies of space and interpret the phenomena which they
exhibit. We quote the following from the previously cited article
in Appleton's Cyclopædia, by Professor Proctor: "Spectroscopic
analysis applied to the stars has shown that they resemble the sun in
general constitution and condition. But characteristic differences
exist, insomuch that the stars have been divided into four orders
distinguished by their spectra. These are thus presented by Secchi,
who examined more than five hundred star spectra: The first type is
represented by Alpha Lyræ, Sirius, etc., and includes most of the
stars shining with a white light, as Altair, Regulus, Rigel, the
stars Beta, Gamma, Epsilon, Zeta, and Eta of Ursa Major, etc. These
give a spectrum showing all the seven colors, and crossed usually
by many lines, but always by the four lines of hydrogen, very dark
and strong. The breadth of these four lines indicates a very deep,
absorptive stratum at a high temperature and at great pressure. Nearly
half the stars observed by Secchi [more than two hundred out of five
hundred] showed this spectrum. The second type includes most of the
yellow stars, as Capella, Pollux, Arcturus, Aldebaran, Alpha of Ursa
Major, Procyon, etc. The Fraunhofer lines are well seen in the red
and blue, but not so well in the yellow. The resemblance of this
spectrum to the sun suggests that stars of this type resemble the
sun closely in physical constitution and condition. About one-third
of the stars observed by Secchi [more than one hundred and fifty
out of five hundred] showed this spectrum. The third type includes
Antares, Alpha of Orion, and Alpha of Hercules, Beta of Pegasus,
Mira, and most of the stars shining with a red light. The spectra
show bands of lines; according to Secchi, there are shaded bands,
but a more powerful spectroscope shows multitudes of fine lines. The
spectra resemble somewhat the spectrum of a sun-spot, and Secchi has
advanced the theory that these stars are covered in great part by
spots like those of the sun. About one hundred [out of five hundred]
of the observed stars belong to this type." (It should be noted that
the presence of sun-spots is no evidence of diminished heat in a sun;
see Professor Proctor in his "Myths and Marvels of Astronomy," article
"Suns in Flames:" "It may be noticed, in passing, that it is by no
means certain that the time when the sun is most spotted is the time
when he gives out least light.... All the evidence we have tends to
show that when the sun is most spotted his energies are most active. It
is then that the colored flames leap to their greatest height and show
their greatest brilliancy, then also that they show the most rapid and
remarkable changes of shape.") ... "The fourth type differs from the
preceding in the arrangement and appearance of the bands. It includes
only faint stars. A few stars, as Gamma of Cassiopeia, Eta of Argus,
Beta of Lyra, etc., show the lines of hydrogen bright instead of dark,
as though surrounded by hydrogen glowing with a heat more intense
than that of the central orb itself around which the hydrogen exists."

All the above five hundred stars reveal the presence of hydrogen under
precisely such conditions as conform to the general principle involved
in the source and mode of solar energy as herein stated. But a single
star (Betelgeuse) was observed by Huggins and Miller in England which
showed the lines of sodium, magnesium, iron, bismuth, and calcium,
"but found those of hydrogen wanting." Of the spectrum of this gas,
Professor Ball says, "The hydrogen spectrum appears to present a
simplicity not found in the spectrum of any other gas, and therefore
it is with great interest that we examine the spectra of the white
stars, in which the dark lines of hydrogen are unusually strong and
broad." Referring to the new star in the Northern Crown, which burst
forth in 1866, the same writer says, "The feature which made the
spectrum of the new star essentially distinct from that of any other
star that had been previously observed was the presence of certain
bright lines superposed on a spectrum with dark lines of one of the
ordinary types. The position of certain of these lines showed that
one of the luminous gases must be hydrogen." Of this particular star
(Betelgeuse) it is said (Proctor's "Familiar Essays"), "Red stars
and variable stars affect the neighborhood of the Milky Way or of
well-marked star-streams. The constellation Orion is singularly rich
in objects of this class. It is here that the strange 'variable'
Betelgeuse lies. At present this star shows no sign of variation,
but a few years ago it exhibited remarkable changes." We thus see
that Betelgeuse is a variable star, and it must have passed in its
different variations between the limits of extreme brilliancy, in which
the lines of hydrogen appear bright, and that of a less brilliant
stage, in which they appear dark,--that is, as absorption bands. It
has thus, in fact, run the gamut, so to speak, of color changes, and
now occupies an intermediate position in the scale. In his article
"Star unto Star," the same writer says, "On this view we may fairly
assume that the darkness of the hydrogen lines is a characteristic
of stars at a much higher temperature than our sun and suns of the
same class." We have already seen that the spectra of stars of the
fourth type--Appleton's Cyclopædia, "Spectrum Analysis"--"show the
lines of hydrogen bright instead of dark, as though surrounded by
hydrogen glowing with a heat more intense than that of the central
orb itself." Professor Dunkin says, in his work "The Midnight Sky,"
"One of the conclusions drawn by Kirchhoff from these experiments
is that each incandescent gas weakens, by absorption, rays of the
same degree of refrangibility as those it emits; or, in other words,
that the spectrum of each incandescent gas is reversed when this gas
is traversed by rays of the same refrangibility emanating from an
intensely luminous source which gives of itself a continuous spectrum
like that of the sun." ... "The third division, including Betelgeuse,
Antares, Alpha Herculis, and others of like color, seems to be
affected by something peculiar in their physical composition, as if
their photospheres contained a quantity of gas at a lower temperature
than usual. The stars in this class have generally a ruddy tint,
probably owing to their light having undergone some modification
while passing through an absorbing atmosphere.... A great number of
the stars in the third division are variable in their lustre." We may
therefore readily conclude that midway between the inverted lines which
constitute the dark absorption bands and the faint spectra which show
the bright lines of hydrogen direct there must be an atmosphere of
glowing hydrogen superposed upon a deeper one in such proportion that
it will not reveal its presence in the spectroscope at all; for when
the dark and light bands, which occupy precisely the same position in
the spectrum, are of approximately equal intensity the result will
obviously be the neutralization of both. That among a myriad suns,
some with dark hydrogen lines and some with bright, there should occur
occasionally an example corresponding to this point of divergence,
and especially among variable stars, is not only to be expected, but
is, in fact, confirmatory of the general hypothesis itself. It is an
exception which emphatically proves the rule, when we can trace the
operative cause which has produced it.








CHAPTER VI.

THE PHENOMENA OF THE STARS.


Let us now consider the phenomena of the double stars. These
were formerly believed to be single orbs, but the more powerful
telescopes of recent years have shown them to consist of two suns,
each substantially similar to our own sun, revolving around each
other at a relatively small distance apart. In Appleton's Cyclopædia,
article "Star," we read, "It is noteworthy that few simple stars
show such colors as blue, green, violet, or indigo; but among double
and multiple star systems not only are these colors recognized, but
such colors as lilac, olive, gray, russet, and so on. A beautiful
feature in many double stars remains to be noticed: it is often found
that the components exhibit complementary colors. This is oftener
seen among unequal doubles, and then the larger component shows a
color from the red end of the spectrum, as red, orange, or yellow,
while the smaller shows the corresponding color from the blue end,
as green, blue, or purple. The colors are real, not merely the result
of contrast, for when the larger star is concealed the color of the
smaller remains (in most cases) unchanged. Spectrum analysis shows
that the colors of many double stars are due to the absorptive vapors
cutting off certain portions of the light.... The components are
circling around each other, or rather around their common center of
gravity." Professor Ball, in his work "In the High Heavens," says,
"There is no more pleasing phenomenon in sidereal astronomy than
that presented by the contrasted hues often exhibited by double
stars.... It seemed not at all impossible that there might be some
optical explanation of colors so vividly contrasted emanating from
points so contiguous. It was also remembered that blue stars were
generally only present as one member of an associated pair.... When,
however, Dr. Huggins showed that the actual spectrum of the object
demonstrated that the cause of the color in each star arose from
absorption by its peculiar atmosphere, it became impossible to doubt
the reality of the phenomena. Since then it has been for physicists
to explain why two closely neighboring stars should differ so widely
in their atmospheric constituents, for it can be no longer contended
that their beautiful hues arise from an optical illusion."

Of these double stars with complementary colors we quote the following
from Professor Dunkin (who, in turn, quotes from Admiral Smyth, the
author of "Sidereal Chromatics"): "In Eta Cassiopeiæ the large star
is a dull white and the smaller one lilac; in Gamma Andromedæ, a deep
yellow and sea-green; in Iota Cancri, a dusky orange and a sapphire
blue; in Delta Corvi, a bright yellow and purple; and in Albiero,
or Beta Cygni, yellow and blue. In most of the remaining stars of
the list the contrasting colors are equally marked, and also in many
others which are not included in it." Some of these double stars are
variable in their colors, as are the ordinary single variables, and,
of course, for a similar reason,--to wit, the varying intensity of
more or less cumulative planetary impacts.

The interpretation, of course, as explained below, is that these suns,
each one of different mass and consequently of different electrical
resistance, are arranged in parallel circuit along a single line of
electric current; a pair of different-sized arc or incandescent lamps,
similarly arranged, would exhibit precisely the same phenomena. A
compound solar system of this sort, apparently, with double sun and
single planetary system in process of formation, nearly completed
from a spiral nebula, is shown in a gaseous nebula within the
constellation Ursa Minor, illustrated in Lord Rosse's drawing (see
Nichols "Architecture of the Heavens," Plate X., lower figure).

More than three thousand of these binary stars have been catalogued,
and some of them make a complete revolution about their common
centers of gravity--so distant are they from each other--in periods
of not less than sixty, or even eighty, years. Of the double star
Mizar,--the middle one of the three which form the tail of the Great
Bear,--Professor Ball states that, by new methods of spectroscopic
analysis, the component stars which form this double have been found
to be one hundred and fifty millions of miles apart, while Alcor, a
smaller star, visible to the naked eye, and enormously farther from
Mizar than are the components of the latter from each other, moves
through space in a parallel direction and with the same velocity as
its double companion. What the connection may be, if any, we do not
know, but their identical course is obviously related to some common
circumstance of origin, as is the probable case with those other
groups of stars which drift through space together. They show that
solar systems are not necessarily individual creations, but may be
formed in groups at the same period of time, and by the operation of
natural laws simultaneously directed upon or into the creative matter
from which solar systems are built up and sent along their way. It
has been already shown that our sun has a motion around the center
of gravity of our own solar system, as a whole, similar to that of
the binary stars around each other, but that, by reason of his vast
relative mass (seven hundred and fifty to one for all the planets),
this center is always within the confines of his own volume. If,
however, our sun were divided into two suns one, two, or five million
miles apart, each revolving around a common center of gravity situated
between the two, and the planets revolving around the same center
of gravity, but relatively more distant, the planets would thus
rotate around both suns as a common center, and with the electric
polarity of both suns the same, as must necessarily be the case,
they would present phenomena precisely similar to those exhibited by
the double stars. And such might very easily be the case in even a
system so small as our own, for the planet Mercury has so elliptical
an orbit that its distance from the sun varies in different parts
of its annual movement from twenty-eight to forty-five millions
of miles. There would then be mutual electric repulsion of the two
solar electrospheres, such as we see in the case of comets and in
the sun's corona and long streamers. Professor Proctor, article
"The Sun's Long Streamers," says, "These singular appendages, like
the streamers seen by Professor Abbe, extend directly from the sun,
as if he exerted some repellent action.... I cannot but think that
the true explanation of these streamers, whatever it may be (I am not
in the least prepared to say what it is), will be found whensoever
astronomers have found an explanation of comets' tails.... Whether
the repulsive force is electrical, magnetic, or otherwise, does not
at present concern us, or rather does concern us, but at present we
are quite unable to answer the question." A similar example is to
be found in the self-repellent positive electrospheres of the earth
and moon, illustrated on a previous page, which, in fact, are types
among planets of precisely what we find in double stars. Now, if
these double central suns, with a common system of planets revolving
around them both, differ one from the other in size, they will differ
also in the depth and density of their hydrogen atmospheres, and the
electric forces directed against them will produce different results
in each. In one we will have high temperature, great volatilization,
and wide absorption bands; in the other, a shallow atmosphere,
a temperature below that of an extensive volatilization of its
metallic components, and a spectrum rich in light at the blue end,
while the former one will be correspondingly richer in the yellow
and red rays at the opposite and lower end of the spectrum. One,
in fact, will manifest the phenomena of blue-white stars, the other,
those of orange-red, but variously modified in a chromatic series. The
case may be extended to multiple stars, and complementary colors,
more or less perfect, may be almost predicated as the law of compound
solar bodies having cores like that of our sun, but each of different
mass, and surrounded by hydrogen atmospheres of different depths and
densities, both acted upon by the same exterior planetary electrical
currents. It is certainly true of double stars, and probably so of all
the others. Of course such enormously massive double suns presuppose
enormous planets, rotating around them at enormous distances; but
when we compare the distance of our own satellite, the moon, from
the earth with the distance of Neptune from the sun, and consider
that the light of the sun will reach Neptune in about four hours, and
then compare this distance with the inconceivable distances of space
requisite to retard and merge all radiant energy into the diffused
molecular energy of position, our wonder will cease.

We have also to consider those single stars which (see Appleton's
Cyclopædia, article "Star") are variable in their brilliancy. "These
stars may be divided into periodic variables, irregular variables,
and temporary stars. Periodic variable stars are those which undergo
increase and diminution of light at regular intervals. Thus, the
star Mira, or Omicron of Cetus, varies in lustre, in a period of
three hundred and thirty-one and one-third days, from the second
magnitude to a faintness such that the star can only be seen with
a powerful telescope, and thence to the second magnitude again. It
shines for about a fortnight as a star of the second magnitude,
and then remains invisible for five months, the decrease of lustre
occupying about three months, the increase about seven weeks. Such
is the general course of its phases. It does not always, however,
return to the same degree of brightness, nor increase and diminish
by the same gradations; neither are the successive intervals of its
maxima equal. From recent observations and inquiries into its history,
the mean period would appear to be subject to a cyclical fluctuation
embracing eighty-eight such periods, and having the effect of gradually
lengthening and shortening alternately those intervals to the extent
of twenty-five days one way and the other. The irregularities in
the degree of brightness attained at the maximum are probably also
periodical.... It suggests a probable explanation of these changes of
brightness, that when the star is near its minimum, its color changes
from white to a full red, which, from what we know of the spectra of
colored stars, seems to indicate that the loss of brightness is due
to the formation of many spots over the surface of this distant sun.

"Algol is another remarkable variable, passing, however, much more
rapidly through all its changes. It is ordinarily a second-magnitude
star, but during about seven hours in each period of sixty-nine hours
its lustre first diminishes until the star is reduced to a fourth
magnitude, and after it has remained twenty minutes at its minimum its
lustre is gradually restored. It remains a second-magnitude star for
about sixty-two hours in each period of sixty-nine hours. These changes
seem to correspond to what might be expected if a large opaque orb
is circling around this distant sun in a period of sixty-nine hours,
transiting its disk at regular intervals."

Of this star, Professor Ball says, "Applying the improved spectroscopic
process to Algol, he [Vogel] determined on one night that Algol
was retreating from the earth at a speed of twenty-six miles per
second.... When Vogel came to repeat his observations, he found that
Algol was again moving with the same velocity, but this time towards
the earth instead of from it.... It appeared that the movements were
strictly periodic; that is to say, for one day and ten hours the star
is moving towards us, and then for a like time it moves from us, the
maximum speed being ... twenty-six miles a second.... It is invariably
found that every time the movement of retreat is concluded the star
loses its brilliance, and regains it again at the commencement of the
return movement.... The spectroscopic evidence admits of no other
interpretation save that there must be another mighty body in the
immediate vicinity of Algol.... Algol must be attended by a companion
star which, if not absolutely as devoid of intrinsic light as the
earth or the moon, is nevertheless dark relatively to Algol. Once in
each period of revolution this obscure body intrudes itself between
the earth and Algol, cutting off a portion of the direct light from
the star and thus producing the well-known effect." This is, in fact,
a periodic transit or eclipse of Algol by a planet, such as we see in
eclipses of our own sun by the moon and the inner planets, except that
Algol's planet is apparently single like our moon with reference to
the earth, and that it is relatively much larger than any of our own
planets, as we would necessarily suppose it to be, if solitary. Its
mass has been computed by the effects which it produces, and we learn
that it is not a dark sun with a brilliant planet, but a brilliant
sun with a dark planet, just as our solar system presents. "Algol,
at the moment of its greatest eclipse, has lost about three-fifths
of its light; it therefore follows that the dark satellite must have
covered three-fifths of the bright surface.... The period of maximum
obscuration is about twenty minutes, and we know the velocity of the
bright star, which, along with the period of revolution, gives the
magnitude of the orbit." From these data it has been computed that
the globe of Algol itself is about one-fourth larger than that of
our visible sun, but its mass is so much less that its weight is only
one-half that of our sun, so that its body is probably gaseous. The
author concludes, "No one, however, will be likely to doubt that it
is the law of gravitation, pure and simple, which prevails in the
celestial spaces, and consequently we are able to make use of it to
explain the circumstances attending the movements of Algol's dark
companion. This body is the smaller of the two, and the speed with
which it moves is double as great as that of Algol, so that it travels
over as many miles in a second as an express train can get over in an
hour. The companion of Algol is about the same size as our sun, but
has a mass only one-fourth as great. This indicates a globe of matter
which must be largely in the gaseous state, but which, nevertheless,
seems to be devoid of intrinsic luminosity. Their distance [apart]
is always some three million miles. This is, however, an unusually
short distance when compared with the dimensions of the two globes
themselves." With this exception, the author says, "the movements of
Algol and its companion are not very dissimilar to movements in the
solar system with which we are already familiar." It will be seen that
the want of luminosity in the dark companion of Algol finds a ready
explanation in the fact that it is a planet, acting precisely as our
own planets do, and that the luminosity of Algol itself is directly
attributable to the electricity developed by the presence of this
planet rotating axially and orbitally around it, and the darkness of
the planet itself is the necessary correlative of the heat and light
of its sun. The planet has about one-half the density of Saturn, while
Algol has one-half the density of the sun, and hence we should expect
to find on Algol an atmosphere largely composed of glowing hydrogen,
and on its planet an atmosphere largely composed of oxygen, in which,
doubtless, float enormous clouds of aqueous vapor. The interpretation
is direct and conclusive, and upon no other hypothesis can the facts
be explained, for their close connection with each other demonstrates
their common origin, and their masses are not so different one from the
other as to permit, on any theory of their coequal origin as suns, one
to glow with the fires of youth and energy and the other to have grown
dark and dead from old age and exhaustion, and especially so if still
in its gaseous stage, which is that which must characterize its highest
state of incandescent energy from the most active condensation of its
volume, if the nebular hypothesis has any validity whatever. In fact,
this example alone, if the constitution of Algol's dark satellite is
really gaseous, must go very far to throw the gravest doubt, in itself,
on the validity of this hypothesis.

The star Beta, of the constellation Lyra, has a full period of twelve
days and twenty-two hours, divided into two periods of six days and
eleven hours, in each of which the star has a maximum brightness of
about the three and one-half magnitude, but in one period the minimum
is about the four and one-third magnitude, while in the other it
is about the four and one-half magnitude. This peculiarity points,
it is said, to an opaque orb with a satellite, the satellite being
occulted by the primary in the alternative transits, and therefore
the loss of light is less.

The star Delta of Cepheus is quite different, however, for, while it
takes only one, day and fourteen hours in passing from its minimum
to maximum of brightness, it occupies three days and nineteen hours,
or somewhat more than double this time, in passing from maximum to
minimum. Two or three hundred of these variable stars are already
known. The above examples are cited in detail because they furnish
the strongest possible proof of the truth of the hypothesis which we
are endeavoring to present. While the movements of the stars Algol
and Beta Lyræ may find an adequate interpretation in the one case
in a large occulting planet, and in the other in an occulting planet
with a satellite, it is obvious that Mira and Delta Cephei cannot be
explained except by the presence of planetary bodies or satellites
which do not mechanically occult the light of their suns. In these
regularly variable stars it is the light which varies, but of course
the solar heat must vary also,--that is to say, the solar energy varies
regularly, but with unequal periods of growth and decline and with
larger periods of cyclical variation in addition. Such variations can
only be produced by the action of permanently connected and orbitally
rotating planetary bodies, acting dynamically through space, to
regularly increase and diminish the solar energy, and such bodies can
only do this by their orbital positions with reference to each other
and to the central sun itself. In this case, since the activity of
solar energy is most unquestionably varied by the planetary energies,
by their position and movements, at least a portion of solar energy
must be due to planetary action, and if this be so, it may be affirmed
with certainty that substantially all solar energy may be produced in
the same way; for, otherwise, we seek for two diverse causes to produce
a single effect, which may be produced by one. We have no knowledge,
however, of any planetary energy which could operate to increase or
diminish the energy of the central sun in its emission of light, except
that which we have already presented, and no theory of our own sun's
energy hitherto advanced has ever taken cognizance of the planetary
energies of our system as an effective cause for those of the sun. But
while the sun's energy is--as it must be in this case--the outcome of
that of the planets, it is equally obvious that the planets themselves
can have no permanent, inherent energy of their own to generate or
modify such energy of the sun, since they are in fact supplied by
the solar energy, and their motions are controlled and regulated by
the sun itself. Hence the inference is irresistible that the planets
must derive their primary force from an external source not solar,
and this they can only do by means of their rotation in space, and
the only force derivable from space of which we have any knowledge
is electricity, so that the circle thus becomes complete. How now
shall we explain these periodical aberrations of energy? The color
of a star, as we know, is no criterion of its age or size. The color
is due to atmospheric absorption of the radiant light. The double
stars, for example, revolve around each other at regular periods,
and they are necessarily of nearly the same age, as sidereal ages
are computed, but they frequently differ one from the other in color,
and multiple stars may be all different each from the others; and the
color, as before stated, is no criterion of size, for a small sun,
with its glowing hydrogen in a state of high incandescence, and with
few absorption bands in its spectrum, will appear bluish-white, or of
that specific type of stars, without reference to size, while a much
larger sun, with its light darkened by broad absorption bands and
sun-spots, will appear orange or red; and, consequently, difference
of color can be no criterion of distance, since a blue-white star of
small size will outshine a red orb of much greater magnitude, whether
it be more or less distant. The variable stars, for these reasons,
belong to the order of red stars mostly, if not altogether. We must
also bear in mind that sun-spots do not diminish the solar heat, as
they are the result of increased and not of diminished energy. Electric
currents of high potential pass directly, as we know, along the lines
of least resistance to their opposite center of polarity, so that two
planets nearly in conjunction with each other transmit their currents
almost directly towards the sun's center, and upon the same point
of solar latitude, while, if at right angles with the sun, they must
deliver their electricity along converging lines and thus strike the
solar surface at different points. Currents of electricity of high
potential also (see "Electricity in the Service of Man," page 75),
by their own passage, facilitate the passage of succeeding currents,
so that generators discharging along the same lines find less and
less resistance. It is true that we find no appreciable resistance
in the passage of these currents between the earth and the sun, as
their velocity is that of light, but both light and electricity may
be equally retarded by resistance in a small degree. We know also
that in the condensed hydrogen atmosphere of the sun there must be
resistance, and also that the resistance in fluids diminishes as the
temperature rises. Considering now the variable star Mira, as above
described, we observe, as is the case with Delta Cephei, also cited,
that the period between its greatest light, in a descending scale,
and its least is about twice as long as its rise from minimum to
maximum. During a period of four years (1672 to 1676) it is said that
it was not visible at all.

If Mira be considered a relatively small sun, with its axis strongly
inclined to the planetary plane, and having three planets only, two of
them constituting a double planet, like the earth and moon, but nearly
equal in size, and having a rotation about the sun in nearly eleven
months and a rotation about each other in the same period, and, besides
these, a much more distant large planet, something like our Jupiter,
with an orbital period of many years, so that the cycle of relative
positions is complete in about eighty-eight of the shorter periods of
variation, we would have such results as we see in Mira. Twice in each
revolution of the double planet its two members and their sun would be
in conjunction, and we would have great brilliancy and whiteness until
the metallic elements began to volatilize in increased proportions;
then an era of wide absorption bands and redness, gradually increasing
to a maximum after its periods of greatest light, and then slowly
diminishing as the double planet advanced in its rotation; and,
finally, as it again approached conjunction, the brilliant hydrogen
illumination, subsequently followed by the gradually darkened spectrum,
and so on, while the large outer planet by its various positions
would first relatively retard and then accelerate the variation
until its grand cycle was complete. The permanent disappearance for
years, if true, may be due to other causes, which will be referred
to in considering the phenomena of new and temporary stars. Many of
the irregular variables may doubtless be similarly explained,--our
own sun, in fact, being a variable with a period of about eleven
years,--and doubtless the apparent irregularity in most cases is
due to lack of sufficient time for observation. Those stars which
are in fact really irregular in their variation owe their changes,
doubtless, to the same causes which produce new stars, so called,
and "suns in flames," which will be next considered.

Among the countless stars of heaven a great catastrophe seems
occasionally to occur. A star bursts out into sudden flame, to all
appearance, or a great fixed star appears where no star had ever been
seen before. In Professor Proctor's article, "Suns in Flames" ("Myths
and Marvels of Astronomy"), we will find an extended discussion of
these wonderful phenomena. The astronomer Tycho Brahe described the
one which appeared in 1572 as follows: "It suddenly shone forth in
the constellation Cassiopeia with a splendor exceeding that of stars
of the first magnitude, or even Jupiter or Venus at their brightest,
and could be seen by the naked eye on the meridian at full day. Its
brilliancy gradually diminished from the time of its first appearance,
and at the end of sixteen months it entirely disappeared, and has never
been seen since. During the whole time of its apparition its place in
the heavens remained unaltered, and it had no annual parallax, so that
its distance was of the same order as that of the fixed stars." Tycho
described its changes of color as follows: first, as having been of a
bright white; afterwards of a reddish-yellow, like Mars or Aldebaran;
and, lastly, of a leaden white, like Saturn. In 1604 a first-magnitude
star suddenly appeared in the right foot of Ophiucus. "It presented
appearances resembling those shown by the former, and disappeared
after a few months." Many other cases are cited by astronomers, and
in 1866 "a star appeared in the Northern Crown, the observations of
which threw great light on the subject of so-called new stars. In
the first place, it was found that where this new star appeared there
had been a tenth-magnitude star; the new star, then, was in reality
a star long known, which had acquired new brilliancy. "When first
observed with this abnormal lustre, it was shining as a star of the
second magnitude. Examined with the spectroscope, its light revealed a
startling state of things in those remote depths of space. The usual
stellar spectrum, rainbow-tinted and crossed by dark lines, was seen
to be crossed also by four exceedingly bright lines, the spectrum of
glowing hydrogen.... The greater part of the star's light manifestly
came from this glowing hydrogen, though it can scarcely be doubted
that the rest of the spectrum was brighter than before the outburst,
the materials of the star being raised to an intense heat. The maximum
brightness exceeded that of a tenth-magnitude star nearly eight hundred
times. After shining for a short time as a second-magnitude star,
it diminished rapidly in lustre, and it is now between the ninth
and tenth magnitudes" (Appleton's Cyclopædia). Of this new star,
Professor Ball says, "Another memorable achievement in the early part
of Dr. Huggins's career is connected with the celebrated new star that
burst forth in the Crown in 1866. It seemed a fortunate coincidence
that just at the moment when the spectroscope was beginning to be
applied to the sidereal heavens a star of such marvellous character
should have presented itself.... The feature which made the spectrum
of the new star essentially distinct from that of any other star
that had been previously observed was the presence of certain bright
lines superposed on a spectrum with dark lines of one of the ordinary
types. The position of certain of these lines showed that one of the
luminous gases must be hydrogen.... The spectroscope showed that there
must have been something which we may describe as a conflagration
of hydrogen on a stupendous scale, and this outburst would account
for the sudden increase in luminosity of the star, and also to some
extent explain how so stupendous an illumination, once kindled, could
dwindle away in so short a time as a few days." It will be seen that
these new stars leap suddenly into great brilliancy: it is a matter
of a few hours only. After remaining a very short time in this stage
of abnormal incandescence, they gradually die out again in lustre and
revert to their original condition; they are not consumed either in
body or atmosphere.

Several theories have been advanced to account for these remarkable
phenomena; see "Suns in Flames," by Professor Proctor. One is, in
effect, that by some sudd